25605870|a|NLRP3 is the most crucial member of the NLR family, as it detects the existence of pathogen invasion and self-derived molecules associated with cellular damage. Several studies have reported that excessive NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated caspase-1 activation is a key factor in the development of diseases. Recent studies have reported that Syk is involved in pathogen-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation; however, the detailed mechanism linking Syk to NLRP3 inflammasome remains unclear. In this study, we showed that Syk mediates NLRP3 stimuli-induced processing of procaspase-1 and the consequent activation of caspase-1. Moreover, the kinase activity of Syk is required to potentiate caspase-1 activation in a reconstituted NLRP3 inflammasome system in HEK293T cells. The adaptor protein ASC bridges NLRP3 with the effector protein caspase-1. Herein, we find that Syk can associate directly with ASC and NLRP3 by its kinase domain but interact indirectly with procaspase-1. Syk can phosphorylate ASC at Y146 and Y187 residues, and the phosphorylation of both residues is critical to enhance ASC oligomerization and the recruitment of procaspase-1. Together, our results reveal a new molecular pathway through which Syk promotes NLRP3 inflammasome formation, resulting from the phosphorylation of ASC. Thus, the control of Syk activity might be effective to modulate NLRP3 inflammasome activation and treat NLRP3-related immune diseases.

25500533|a|LRRK2, a gene relevant to Parkinson's disease, encodes a scaffolding protein with both GTPase and kinase activities. LRRK2 protein is itself phosphorylated and therefore is subject to regulation by cell signalling; however, the kinase(s) responsible for this event have not been definitively identified. Here using an unbiased siRNA kinome screen, we identify and validate casein kinase 1α (CK1α) as being responsible for LRRK2 phosphorylation, including in the adult mouse striatum. We further show that LRRK2 recruitment to TGN46-positive Golgi-derived vesicles is modulated by constitutive LRRK2 phosphorylation by CK1α. These effects are mediated by differential protein interactions of LRRK2 with a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, ARHGEF7. These pathways are therefore likely involved in the physiological maintenance of the Golgi in cells, which may play a role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. 

22582013|a|Protein phosphorylation is a fundamental mechanism regulating nearly every aspect of cellular life. Several secreted proteins are phosphorylated, but the kinases responsible are unknown. We identified a family of atypical protein kinases that localize within the Golgi apparatus and are secreted. Fam20C appears to be the Golgi casein kinase that phosphorylates secretory pathway proteins within S-x-E motifs. Fam20C phosphorylates the caseins and several secreted proteins implicated in biomineralization, including the small integrin-binding ligand, N-linked glycoproteins (SIBLINGs). Consequently, mutations in Fam20C cause an osteosclerotic bone dysplasia in humans known as Raine syndrome. Fam20C is thus a protein kinase dedicated to the phosphorylation of extracellular proteins.

20856200|a|The PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is aberrant in a wide variety of cancers. Downstream effectors of AKT are involved in survival, growth and metabolic-related pathways. In contrast, contradictory data relating to AKT effects on cell motility and invasion, crucial prometastatic processes, have been reported pointing to a potential cell type and isoform type-specific AKT-driven function. By implication, study of AKT signaling should optimally be conducted in an appropriate intracellular environment. Prognosis in soft-tissue sarcoma (STS), the aggressive malignancies of mesenchymal origin, is poor, reflecting our modest ability to control metastasis, an effort hampered by lack of insight into molecular mechanisms driving STS progression and dissemination. We examined the impact of the cancer progression-relevant AKT pathway on the mesenchymal tumor cell internal milieu. We demonstrate that AKT1 activation induces STS cell motility and invasiveness at least partially through a novel interaction with the intermediate filament vimentin (Vim). The binding of AKT (tail region) to Vim (head region) results in Vim Ser39 phosphorylation enhancing the ability of Vim to induce motility and invasion while protecting Vim from caspase-induced proteolysis. Moreover, vimentin phosphorylation was shown to enhance tumor and metastasis growth in vivo. Insights into this mesenchymal-related molecular mechanism may facilitate the development of critically lacking therapeutic options for these devastating malignancies.

20890306|a|Phosphorylation of the Fas-associated death domain (FADD) protein sensitizes cancer cells to various chemotherapeutics. However, the molecular mechanism underlying chemosensitization by phosphorylated FADD (P-FADD) is poorly understood. In this study, we describe the physical interactions and functional interplay between Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) and FADD. Plk1 phosphorylates FADD at Ser-194 in response to treatment with taxol. Overexpression of a phosphorylation-mimicking mutant, FADD S194D, caused degradation of Plk1 in an ubiquitin-independent manner, and delayed cytokinesis, consistent with the expected cellular phenotype of Plk1 deficiency. This demonstrates that Plk1 is regulated via a negative feedback loop by its substrate, FADD. Overexpression of FADD S194D sensitized HeLa cells to a low dose of taxol independently of caspase activation, whereas overexpression of FADD S194D resulted in caspase activation in response to a high dose of taxol. Therefore, we examined whether the death potential of P-FADD affected Plk1-mediated tumorigenesis. Transfection of FADD S194D inhibited colony formation by Plk1-overexpressing HeLa cells (HeLa-Plk1). Moreover, overexpression of FADD S194D suppressed tumorigenesis in nude mice xenografted with HeLa-Plk1. Therefore, this study reports the first in vivo validation of tumor-suppressing activity of P-FADD. Collectively, our data demonstrate that in response to taxol, Plk1 endows death-promoting and tumor-suppressor functions to its substrate, FADD.

20861839|a|Symplekin (Pta1 in yeast) is a scaffold in the large protein complex that is required for 3'-end cleavage and polyadenylation of eukaryotic messenger RNA precursors (pre-mRNAs); it also participates in transcription initiation and termination by RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Symplekin mediates interactions between many different proteins in this machinery, although the molecular basis for its function is not known. Here we report the crystal structure at 2.4 Å resolution of the amino-terminal domain (residues 30-340) of human symplekin in a ternary complex with the Pol II carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) Ser 5 phosphatase Ssu72 (refs 7, 10-17) and a CTD Ser 5 phosphopeptide. The N-terminal domain of symplekin has the ARM or HEAT fold, with seven pairs of antiparallel α-helices arranged in the shape of an arc. The structure of Ssu72 has some similarity to that of low-molecular-mass phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase, although Ssu72 has a unique active-site landscape as well as extra structural features at the C terminus that are important for interaction with symplekin. Ssu72 is bound to the concave face of symplekin, and engineered mutations in this interface can abolish interactions between the two proteins. The CTD peptide is bound in the active site of Ssu72, with the pSer 5-Pro 6 peptide bond in the cis configuration, which contrasts with all other known CTD peptide conformations. Although the active site of Ssu72 is about 25 Å from the interface with symplekin, we found that the symplekin N-terminal domain stimulates Ssu72 CTD phosphatase activity in vitro. Furthermore, the N-terminal domain of symplekin inhibits polyadenylation in vitro, but only when coupled to transcription. Because catalytically active Ssu72 overcomes this inhibition, our results show a role for mammalian Ssu72 in transcription-coupled pre-mRNA 3'-end processing.

20668449|a|The post-translational methylation of alpha-amino groups was first discovered over 30 years ago on the bacterial ribosomal proteins L16 and L33 (refs 1, 2), but almost nothing is known about the function or enzymology of this modification. Several other bacterial and eukaryotic proteins have since been shown to be alpha-N-methylated. However, the Ran guanine nucleotide-exchange factor, RCC1, is the only protein for which any biological function of alpha-N-methylation has been identified. Methylation-defective mutants of RCC1 have reduced affinity for DNA and cause mitotic defects, but further characterization of this modification has been hindered by ignorance of the responsible methyltransferase. All fungal and animal N-terminally methylated proteins contain a unique N-terminal motif, Met-(Ala/Pro/Ser)-Pro-Lys, indicating that they may be targets of the same, unknown enzyme. The initiating Met is cleaved, and the exposed alpha-amino group is mono-, di- or trimethylated. Here we report the discovery of the first alpha-N-methyltransferase, which we named N-terminal RCC1 methyltransferase (NRMT). Substrate docking and mutational analysis of RCC1 defined the NRMT recognition sequence and enabled the identification of numerous new methylation targets, including SET (also known as TAF-I or PHAPII) and the retinoblastoma protein, RB. Knockdown of NRMT recapitulates the multi-spindle phenotype seen with methylation-defective RCC1 mutants, demonstrating the importance of alpha-N-methylation for normal bipolar spindle formation and chromosome segregation.

20637424|a|Crystal structures of inactive PAK1(K299R) and the activation (A)-loop phospho-mimetic PAK1(T423E) have suggested that the kinase domain is in an active state regardless of activation loop status. Contrary to a large body of literature, we find that neither is PAK1(T423E) active in cells, nor does it exhibit significant activity in vitro. To explain these discrepancies all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of PAK1(phospho-T423) in complex with ATP and substrate were performed. These simulations point to a key interaction between PAK1 Lys308, at the end of the alphaC helix, and the pThr423 phosphate group, not seen in X-ray structures. The orthologous PAK4 Arg359 fulfills the same role in immobilizing the alphaC helix. These in silico predictions were validated by experimental mutagenesis of PAK1 and PAK4. The simulations explain why the PAK1 A-loop phospho-mimetic is inactive, but also point to a key functional interaction likely found in other protein kinases.

20642453|a|LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat protein kinase 2) is mutated in a significant number of Parkinson's disease patients, but still little is understood about how it is regulated or functions. In the present study we have demonstrated that 14-3-3 protein isoforms interact with LRRK2. Consistent with this, endogenous LRRK2 isolated from Swiss 3T3 cells or various mouse tissues is associated with endogenous 14-3-3 isoforms. We have established that 14-3-3 binding is mediated by phosphorylation of LRRK2 at two conserved residues (Ser910 and Ser935) located before the leucine-rich repeat domain. Our results suggests that mutation of Ser910 and/or Ser935 to disrupt 14-3-3 binding does not affect intrinsic protein kinase activity, but induces LRRK2 to accumulate within discrete cytoplasmic pools, perhaps resembling inclusion bodies. To investigate links between 14-3-3 binding and Parkinson's disease, we studied how 41 reported mutations of LRRK2 affected 14-3-3 binding and cellular localization. Strikingly, we found that five of the six most common pathogenic mutations (R1441C, R1441G, R1441H, Y1699C and I2020T) display markedly reduced phosphorylation of Ser910/Ser935 thereby disrupting interaction with 14-3-3. We have also demonstrated that Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding to endogenous LRRK2 is significantly reduced in tissues of homozygous LRRK2(R1441C) knock-in mice. Consistent with 14-3-3 regulating localization, all of the common pathogenic mutations displaying reduced 14-3-3-binding accumulated within inclusion bodies. We also found that three of the 41 LRRK2 mutations analysed displayed elevated protein kinase activity (R1728H, ~2-fold; G2019S, ~3-fold; and T2031S, ~4-fold). These results provide the first evidence suggesting that 14-3-3 regulates LRRK2 and that disruption of the interaction of LRRK2 with 14-3-3 may be linked to Parkinson's disease.

20708156|a|Mdm2 is the major negative regulator of the p53 pathway. Here, we report that Mdm2 is rapidly degraded after DNA damage and that phosphorylation of Mdm2 by casein kinase I (CKI) at multiple sites triggers its interaction with, and subsequent ubiquitination and destruction, by SCF(beta-TRCP). Inactivation of either beta-TRCP or CKI results in accumulation of Mdm2 and decreased p53 activity, and resistance to apoptosis induced by DNA damaging agents. Moreover, SCF(beta-TRCP)-dependent Mdm2 turnover also contributes to the control of repeated p53 pulses in response to persistent DNA damage. Our results provide insight into the signaling pathways controlling Mdm2 destruction and further suggest that compromised regulation of Mdm2 results in attenuated p53 activity, thereby facilitating tumor progression.

20659021|a|LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat protein kinase 2) is mutated in a significant number of Parkinson's disease patients. Since a common mutation that replaces Gly2019 with a serine residue enhances kinase catalytic activity, small-molecule LRRK2 inhibitors might have utility in treating Parkinson's disease. However, the effectiveness of inhibitors is difficult to assess, as no physiological substrates or downstream effectors have been identified that could be exploited to develop a robust cell-based assay. We recently established that LRRK2 bound 14-3-3 protein isoforms via its phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935. In the present study we show that treatment of Swiss 3T3 cells or lymphoblastoid cells derived from control or a Parkinson's disease patient harbouring a homozygous LRRK2(G2019S) mutation with two structurally unrelated inhibitors of LRRK2 (H-1152 or sunitinib) induced dephosphorylation of endogenous LRRK2 at Ser910 and Ser935, thereby disrupting 14-3-3 interaction. Our results suggest that H-1152 and sunitinib induce dephosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 by inhibiting LRRK2 kinase activity, as these compounds failed to induce significant dephosphorylation of a drug-resistant LRRK2(A2016T) mutant. Moreover, consistent with the finding that non-14-3-3-binding mutants of LRRK2 accumulated within discrete cytoplasmic pools resembling inclusion bodies, we observed that H-1152 causes LRRK2 to accumulate within inclusion bodies. These findings indicate that dephosphorylation of Ser910/Ser935, disruption of 14-3-3 binding and/or monitoring LRRK2 cytoplasmic localization can be used as an assay to assess the relative activity of LRRK2 inhibitors in vivo. These results will aid the elaboration and evaluation of LRRK2 inhibitors. They will also stimulate further research to understand how phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 is controlled by LRRK2, and establish any relationship to development of Parkinson's disease.

20708153|a|Regulators of mitosis have been successfully targeted to enhance response to taxane chemotherapy. Here, we show that the salt inducible kinase 2 (SIK2) localizes at the centrosome, plays a key role in the initiation of mitosis, and regulates the localization of the centrosome linker protein, C-Nap1, through S2392 phosphorylation. Interference with the known SIK2 inhibitor PKA induced SIK2-dependent centrosome splitting in interphase while SIK2 depletion blocked centrosome separation in mitosis, sensitizing ovarian cancers to paclitaxel in culture and in xenografts. Depletion of SIK2 also delayed G1/S transition and reduced AKT phosphorylation. Higher expression of SIK2 significantly correlated with poor survival in patients with high-grade serous ovarian cancers. We believe these data identify SIK2 as a plausible target for therapy in ovarian cancers.

20705607|a|The related RING domain proteins MdmX and Mdm2 are best known for their role as negative regulators of the tumor suppressor p53. However, although Mdm2 functions as a ubiquitin ligase for p53, MdmX does not have appreciable ubiquitin ligase activity. In this study, we performed a mutational analysis of the RING domain of MdmX, and we identified two distinct regions that, when replaced by the respective regions of Mdm2, turn MdmX into an active ubiquitin ligase for p53. Mdm2 and MdmX form homodimers as well as heterodimers with each other. One of the regions identified localizes to the dimer interface indicating that subtle conformational changes in this region either affect dimer stability and/or the interaction with the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UbcH5b. The second region contains the cryptic nucleolar localization signal of Mdm2 but is also assumed to be involved in the interaction with UbcH5b. Here, we show that this region has a significant impact on the ability of respective MdmX mutants to functionally interact with UbcH5b in vitro supporting the notion that this region serves two distinct functional purposes, nucleolar localization and ubiquitin ligase activity. Finally, evidence is provided to suggest that the RING domain of Mdm2 not only binds to UbcH5b but also acts as an allosteric activator of UbcH5b.

20832753|a|BMK1 is activated by mitogens and oncogenic signals and, thus, is strongly implicated in tumorigenesis. We found that BMK1 interacted with promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), and inhibited its tumor-suppressor function through phosphorylation. Furthermore, activated BMK1 notably inhibited PML-dependent activation of p21. To further investigate the BMK-mediated inhibition of the tumor suppressor activity of PML in tumor cells, we developed a small-molecule inhibitor of the kinase activity of BMK1, XMD8-92. Inhibition of BMK1 by XMD8-92 blocked tumor cell proliferation in vitro and significantly inhibited tumor growth in vivo by 95%, demonstrating the efficacy and tolerability of BMK1-targeted cancer treatment in animals.

18922877|a|The central role of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) in activating host immune responses stems from their high capacity to express alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) after stimulation of Toll-like receptors 7 and 9 (TLR7 and -9). This involves the adapter MyD88 and the kinases interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1), IRAK4, and IkappaB kinase alpha (IKKalpha), which activates IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) and is independent of the canonical kinases TBK1 and IKKepsilon. We have recently shown that the immunosuppressive measles virus (MV) abolishes TLR7/9/MyD88-dependent IFN induction in human pDC (Schlender et al., J. Virol. 79:5507-5515, 2005), but the molecular mechanisms remained elusive. Here, we have reconstituted the pathway in cell lines and identified IKKalpha and IRF7 as specific targets of the MV V protein (MV-V). Binding of MV-V to IKKalpha resulted in phosphorylation of V on the expense of IRF7 phosphorylation by IKKalpha in vitro and in living cells. This corroborates the role of IKKalpha as the kinase phosphorylating IRF7. MV-V in addition bound to IRF7 and to phosphomimetic IRF7 and inhibited IRF7 transcriptional activity. Binding to both IKKalpha and IRF7 required the 68-amino-acid unique C-terminal domain of V. Inhibition of TLR/MyD88-dependent IFN induction by MV-V is unique among paramyxovirus V proteins and should contribute to the unique immunosuppressive phenotype of measles. The mechanisms employed by MV-V inspire strategies to interfere with immunopathological TLR/MyD88 signaling.

18971944|a|The DNA damage response (DDR) has an essential function in maintaining genomic stability. Ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM)-checkpoint kinase 2 (Chk2) and ATM- and Rad3-related (ATR)-Chk1, triggered, respectively, by DNA double-strand breaks and blocked replication forks, are two major DDRs processing structurally complicated DNA damage. In contrast, damage repaired by base excision repair (BER) is structurally simple, but whether, and how, the DDR is involved in repairing this damage is unclear. Here, we demonstrated that ATM-Chk2 was activated in the early response to oxidative and alkylation damage, known to be repaired by BER. Furthermore, Chk2 formed a complex with XRCC1, the BER scaffold protein, and phosphorylated XRCC1 in vivo and in vitro at Thr(284). A mutated XRCC1 lacking Thr(284) phosphorylation was linked to increased accumulation of unrepaired BER intermediate, reduced DNA repair capacity, and higher sensitivity to alkylation damage. In addition, a phosphorylation-mimic form of XRCC1 showed increased interaction with glycosylases, but not other BER proteins. Our results are consistent with the phosphorylation of XRCC1 by ATM-Chk2 facilitating recruitment of downstream BER proteins to the initial damage recognition/excision step to promote BER.

18660751|a|We have recently identified a new form of post-translational regulation of BACE1 (beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme 1), a membrane protein that acts as the rate-limiting enzyme in the generation of the Alzheimer disease amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta). Specifically, BACE1 is transiently acetylated on seven lysine residues in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum/endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ER/ERGIC). The acetylated intermediates of the nascent protein are able to reach the Golgi apparatus, whereas the non-acetylated ones are retained and degraded in a post-ER compartment. Here, we report that the serine protease PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin type 9) contributes to the disposal of non-acetylated BACE1. Both overexpression and small interfering RNA-mediated downregulation of PCSK9 affected the levels of BACE1. The downregulation of PCSK9 affected the levels of the loss-of-acetylation mutants (BACE1(Ala) and BACE1(Arg)) but not those of the gain-of-acetylation mutant (BACE1(Gln)). In addition, Pcsk9(-/-) mice showed increased levels of BACE1 and Abeta in the brain. Finally, we found that nascent low-density lipoprotein receptor, a known substrate of PCSK9, is also acetylated.

18833288|a|The p53 cofactor Strap (stress responsive activator of p300) is directly targeted by the DNA damage signalling pathway where phosphorylation by ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) kinase facilitates nuclear accumulation. Here, we show that Strap regulation reflects the coordinated interplay between different DNA damage-activated protein kinases, ATM and Chk2 (Checkpoint kinase 2), where phosphorylation by each kinase provides a distinct functional consequence on the activity of Strap. ATM phosphorylation prompts nuclear accumulation, which we show occurs by impeding nuclear export, whereas Chk2 phosphorylation augments protein stability once Strap has attained a nuclear location. These results highlight the various functional roles undertaken by the DNA damage signalling kinases in Strap control and, more generally, shed light on the pathways that contribute to the regulation of the p53 response.

18936167|a|Functional inactivation of the protein tyrosine phosphatase DEP-1 leads to increased endothelial cell proliferation and failure of vessels to remodel and branch. DEP-1 has also been proposed to contribute to the contact inhibition of endothelial cell growth via dephosphorylation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2), a mediator of vascular development. However, how DEP-1 regulates VEGF-dependent signaling and biological responses remains ill-defined. We show here that DEP-1 targets tyrosine residues in the VEGFR2 kinase activation loop. Consequently, depletion of DEP-1 results in the increased phosphorylation of all major VEGFR2 autophosphorylation sites, but surprisingly, not in the overall stimulation of VEGF-dependent signaling. The increased phosphorylation of Src on Y529 under these conditions results in impaired Src and Akt activation. This inhibition is similarly observed upon expression of catalytically inactive DEP-1, and coexpression of an active Src-Y529F mutant rescues Akt activation. Reduced Src activity correlates with decreased phosphorylation of Gab1, an adapter protein involved in VEGF-dependent Akt activation. Hypophosphorylated Gab1 is unable to fully associate with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, VEGFR2, and VE-cadherin complexes, leading to suboptimal Akt activation and increased cell death. Overall, our results reveal that despite its negative role on global VEGFR2 phosphorylation, DEP-1 is a positive regulator of VEGF-mediated Src and Akt activation and endothelial cell survival.

18675813|a|TRPM6 and TRPM7 encode channel-kinases. While these channels share electrophysiological properties and cellular functions, TRPM6 and TRPM7 are non-redundant genes raising the possibility that the kinases have distinct substrates. Here, we demonstrate that TRPM6 and TRPM7 phosphorylate the assembly domain of myosin IIA, IIB and IIC on identical residues. Whereas phosphorylation of myosin IIA is restricted to the coiled-coil domain, TRPM6 and TRPM7 also phosphorylate the non-helical tails of myosin IIB and IIC. TRPM7 does not phosphorylate eukaryotic elongation factor-2 (eEF-2) and myosin II is a poor substrate for eEF-2 kinase. In conclusion, TRPM6 and TRPM7 share exogenous substrates among themselves but not with functionally distant alpha-kinases.

18835089|a|Cell migration is fundamental for invasion and metastasis and is modulated by the reversible phosphorylation of tyrosine residues on target proteins. Here we report that the tyrosine phosphatase HD-PTP has a role in modulating the motility of T24 bladder carcinoma cells. Indeed, HD-PTP silencing by RNA interference (RNAi) markedly induced cell migration in a Src dependent fashion. We therefore investigated the interaction and the regulation of Src and HD-PTP. We found that, in Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) stimulated cells, Src binds to and phosphorylates HD-PTP on tyrosine residues. On the contrary, HD-PTP does not modulate the levels of Src phosphorylation. Interestingly, HD-PTP also binds to FAK, another regulator of cell migration, and this interaction is inhibited after exposure to EGF. FAK phosphorylates HD-PTP and this event reduced the interactions between the two proteins. Interestingly, in cells silencing HD-PTP the phosphorylation of FAK is enhanced and this correlates with its localization in focal complexes both in the presence and in the absence of EGF. We hypothesize that in unstimulated T24 cells HD-PTP does not interact with Src, while it binds to FAK. Following stimulation with EGF, HD-PTP is tyrosine-phosphorylated and releases FAK which will ultimately contribute to the turn-over of focal adhesion and, therefore, to cell motility.

18755143|a|The cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR) controls Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) during excitation-contraction coupling. Three phosphorylation sites have been identified: Serine-(S)2808, S2814 and recently S2030. We measured phosphorylation with at least two different antibodies per site and demonstrate that for S2808 results were highly antibody-dependent and two out of three S2808 antibodies did not accurately report phosphorylation level. The RyR was substantially phosphorylated in quiescent rat cardiomyocytes at S2808 and less so at S2814, but appeared to be unphosphorylated at S2030. Basal phosphorylation at S2808/S2814 was maintained by a Ca2+ dependent kinase other than Ca2+/Calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMKII). During stimulation with Isoproterenol S2808 was phosphorylated by protein kinase A (PKA) and S2814 was phosphorylated by CaMKII. Phosphatase 1 appears to be the main phosphatase dephosphorylating S2808/S2814, but phosphatase 2a may also dephosphorylate S2814. RyR phosphorylation is complex, but important in understanding RyR functional modulation.

18692505|a|In entomopathogenic fungi, secretory protein phosphatases might function in the utilization of phosphoproteins from the environment. But if secreted into the host, secretory protein phosphatases might play a role in pathogenesis by dephosphorylation of host phosphoproteins. Our group purified a novel phosphatase from entomopathogenic fungi, Metarhizium anisopliae. The substrate specificity and inhibitor sensitivity indicate that the phosphatase is a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). In order to analyze the targets of the PTPase in Locusta migratoria hemolymph, two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry were used. The results indicated that the PTPase could specifically dephosphorylate two phosphoproteins from L. migratoria hemolymph. One phosphoprotein was identified as trans-Golgi p230. Previous studies have shown that trans-Golgi p230 participates in vesicular transport of functional proteins from the distal Golgi compartment. trans-Golgi p230 can be inactivated by dephosphorylation, which implies that M. anisopliae could interfere with the correct transportation of functional proteins by secreting extracellular PTPase into the hemolymph. There are some secretion proteins, such as transferrin, have been thought to participate in the insect innate immune against microbial infection, therefor M. anisopliae could interfere with immune defenses of L. migratoria by secreting extracellular PTPase into the hemolymph.

18650932|a|The atypical PKC-interacting protein, Par-4, inhibits cell survival and tumorigenesis in vitro, and its genetic inactivation in mice leads to reduced lifespan, enhanced benign tumour development and low-frequency carcinogenesis. Here, we demonstrate that Par-4 is highly expressed in normal lung but reduced in human lung cancer samples. We show, in a mouse model of lung tumours, that the lack of Par-4 dramatically enhances Ras-induced lung carcinoma formation in vivo, acting as a negative regulator of Akt activation. We also demonstrate in cell culture, in vivo, and in biochemical experiments that Akt regulation by Par-4 is mediated by PKCzeta, establishing a new paradigm for Akt regulation and, likely, for Ras-induced lung carcinogenesis, wherein Par-4 is a novel tumour suppressor.

18758438|a|Phosphorylation of histone H2AX on Ser 139 (gammaH2AX) is one of the earliest events in the response to DNA double-strand breaks; however, the subsequent removal of gammaH2AX from chromatin is less understood, despite being a process tightly coordinated with DNA repair. Previous studies in yeast have identified the Pph3 phosphatase (the PP4C orthologue) as important for the dephosphorylation of gammaH2AX. By contrast, work in human cells attributed this activity to PP2A. Here, we report that PP4 contributes to the dephosphorylation of gammaH2AX, both at the sites of DNA damage and in undamaged chromatin in human cells, independently of a role in DNA repair. Furthermore, depletion of PP4C results in a prolonged checkpoint arrest, most likely owing to the persistence of mediator of DNA damage checkpoint 1 (MDC1) at the sites of DNA lesions. Taken together, these results indicate that PP4 is an evolutionarily conserved gammaH2AX phosphatase.

18971339|a|As part of the mammalian cell innate immune response, the double-stranded RNA activated protein kinase PKR phosphorylates the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha to inhibit protein synthesis and thus block viral replication. Poxviruses including vaccinia and smallpox viruses express PKR inhibitors such as the vaccinia virus K3L protein that resembles the N-terminal substrate-targeting domain of eIF2alpha. Whereas high-level expression of human PKR was toxic in yeast, this growth inhibition was suppressed by coexpression of the K3L protein. We used this yeast assay to screen for PKR mutants that are resistant to K3L inhibition, and we identified 12 mutations mapping to the C-terminal lobe of the PKR kinase domain. The PKR mutations specifically conferred resistance to the K3L protein both in yeast and in vitro. Consistently, the PKR-D486V mutation led to nearly a 15-fold decrease in K3L binding affinity yet did not impair eIF2alpha phosphorylation. Our results support the identification of the eIF2alpha-binding site on an extensive face of the C-terminal lobe of the kinase domain, and they indicate that subtle changes to the PKR kinase domain can drastically impact pseudosubstrate inhibition while leaving substrate phosphorylation intact. We propose that these paradoxical effects of the PKR mutations on pseudosubstrate vs. substrate interactions reflect differences between the rigid K3L protein and the plastic nature of eIF2alpha around the Ser-51 phosphorylation site.

18836454|a|Apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide-like 3G (APOBEC3G, referred to here as A3G) is a potent antiretroviral host factor against human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). HIV-1 viral infectivity factor (Vif) counteracts A3G by promoting its degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Recent studies demonstrated that protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylates activation-induced deaminase (AID), another member of the APOBEC3 family. A3G has two putative PKA phosphorylation residues. Here we show that PKA binds and specifically phosphorylates A3G at Thr32 in vitro and in vivo. This phosphorylation event reduces the binding of A3G to Vif and its subsequent ubiquitination and degradation, and thus promotes A3G antiviral activity. Computer-assisted structural modeling and mutagenesis studies suggest that the interaction between A3G Thr32 and Arg24 is crucial for interaction with Vif. These data imply that PKA-mediated phosphorylation of A3G can regulate the interaction between A3G and Vif.

18836456|a|The Ink4a-Arf-Ink4b locus has a crucial role in both cellular senescence and tumorigenesis. JmjC domain-containing histone demethylase 1b (Jhdm1b, also known as Kdm2b and Fbxl10), the mammalian paralog of the histone demethylase Jhdm1a (also known as Kdm2a and Fbxl11), has been implicated in cell-cycle regulation and tumorigenesis. In this report, we show that Jhdm1b is a histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36) demethylase. Knockdown of Jhdm1b in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts inhibits cell proliferation and induces cellular senescence in a pRb- and p53 pathway-dependent manner. Notably, the effect of Jhdm1b on cell proliferation and cellular senescence is mediated through derepression of p15(Ink4b), as loss of p15(Ink4b) function rescues cell-proliferation defects in Jhdm1b-knockdown cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation on ectopically expressed Jhdm1b demonstrates that Jhdm1b targets the p15(Ink4b) locus and regulates its expression in an enzymatic activity-dependent manner. Alteration of Jhdm1b level affects Ras-induced neoplastic transformation. Collectively, our results indicate that Jhdm1b is an H3K36 demethylase that regulates cell proliferation and senescence through p15(Ink4b).

18719096|a|Amplification of the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2 is frequently observed in breast cancer. Amplification of erbB2 is also associated with multiple genomic gains and losses; however, the importance of these associated changes is largely unknown. We demonstrate that Brk, a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase, is coamplified and coexpressed with ErbB2 in human breast cancers. ErbB2 interacts with Brk and increases its intrinsic kinase activity. Expression of Brk enhances the ErbB2-induced activation of Ras/MAPK signaling and cyclin E/cdk2 activity to induce cell proliferation of mammary 3-dimensional acini in culture. In a murine model of breast cancer, expression of Brk was found to shorten the latency of ErbB2-induced tumors by promoting cell proliferation, with no effect on protection from apoptosis. Furthermore, overexpression of Brk conferred resistance to the ability of Lapatinib, an ErbB2 kinase inhibitor, to inhibit ErbB2-induced proliferation. Thus, we identified Brk as a drug target for ErbB2-positive cancers.

19011111|a|The Par-1 protein kinases are conserved from yeast to humans, where they function as key polarity determinants. The mammalian Par-1 family is comprised of 4 members (Par-1a, -b, -c, and -d). Previously, we demonstrated that atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) phosphorylates the Par-1 kinases on a conserved threonine residue (T595) to regulate localization and kinase activity. Here, we demonstrate that Par-1b is also regulated by another arm of the PKC pathway, one that involves novel PKCs (nPKC) and protein kinase D. Treatment of cells with the PKC activator phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) potently stimulated phosphorylation of Par-1b on serine 400 (S400), a residue that is conserved in all 4 mammalian Par-1 kinases as well as the fly ortholog. We demonstrate that PMA stimulates nPKC to activate PKD, which in turn directly phosphorylates Par-1b on S400 to positively regulate 14-3-3 binding and to negatively regulate membrane association. Thus, 2 arms of the PKC pathway regulate interactions between Par-1b and 14-3-3 proteins: one involving aPKC and the other nPKC/PKD.

19015526|a|Ribonucleotide reductase small subunit p53R2 was identified as a p53 target gene that provides dNTP for DNA damage repair. However, the slow transcriptional induction of p53R2 in RNA may not be rapid enough for prompt DNA damage repair, which has to occur within a few hours of damage. Here, we demonstrate that p53R2 becomes rapidly phosphorylated at Ser(72) by ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) within 30 min after genotoxic stress. p53R2, as well as its heterodimeric partner RRM1, are associated with ATM in vivo. Mutational studies further indicate that ATM-mediated Ser(72) phosphorylation is essential for maintaining p53R2 protein stability and conferring resistance to DNA damage. The mutation of Ser(72) on p53R2 to alanine results in the hyperubiquitination of p53R2 and reduces p53R2 stability. MDM2, a ubiquitin ligase for p53, interacts and facilitates ubiquitination of the S72A-p53R2 mutant more efficiently than WT-p53R2 after DNA damage in vivo. Our results strongly suggest a novel mechanism for the regulation of p53R2 activity via ATM-mediated phosphorylation at Ser(72) and MDM2-dependent turnover of p53R2 dephosphorylated at the same residue.

19011756|a|Protein kinase CK2 is a highly conserved serine/threonine kinase that is ubiquitously expressed in eukaryotic cells. CK2 is a constitutively active tetrameric enzyme composed of two catalytic alpha and/or alpha'-subunits and two regulatory beta-subunits. There is increasing evidence that the individual subunits may have independent functions and that they are asymmetrically distributed inside the cell. To gain a better understanding of the functions of the individual subunits, we employed a yeast-two-hybrid screen with CK2alpha and CK2alpha'. We identified the motor neuron protein KIF5C as a new binding partner for CK2. The interaction found in the yeast-two-hybrid screen was confirmed by co-sedimentation analysis on a sucrose density gradient and by co-immunoprecipitation analysis. Pull-down experiments and surface plasmon resonance spectrometry revealed a direct binding of KIF5C to CK2alpha'. Co-localization studies with neuroblastoma cells, bone marrow and with primary neurons confirmed the biochemical analysis that KIF5C preferentially bound to CK2alpha'.

18692471|a|Mast cells are known to play a pivotal role in allergic diseases. Cross-linking of the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcepsilonRI) leads to degranulation and allergic inflammation; however, the regulatory mechanisms of IgE-dependent exocytosis remain unknown. We show here that IkappaB kinase (IKK) 2 in mast cells plays critical roles in IgE-mediated anaphylaxis in vivo, and IgE-mediated degranulation in vitro, in an NF-kB-independent manner. Upon FcvarepsilonRI stimulation, IKK2 phosphorylates SNAP-23, the target membrane soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE), and ectopic expression of a phospho-mimetic mutant of SNAP-23 partially rescued the impaired IgE-mediated degranulation in IKK2-deficient mast cells. These results suggest that IKK2 phosphorylation of SNAP-23 leads to degranulation and anaphylactic reactions. While this reaction is NF-kB-independent, we additionally show that IKK2 also regulates late-phase allergic reactions promoted by the release of proinflammatory cytokines in an NF-kB-dependent manner. The findings suggest that IKK2 is a central player in allergic reactions.

18805092|a|Cullin-RING ligases (CRLs) comprise the largest ubiquitin E3 subclass, in which a central cullin subunit links a substrate-binding adaptor with an E2-binding RING. Covalent attachment of the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8 to a conserved C-terminal domain (ctd) lysine stimulates CRL ubiquitination activity and prevents binding of the inhibitor CAND1. Here we report striking conformational rearrangements in the crystal structure of NEDD8~Cul5(ctd)-Rbx1 and SAXS analysis of NEDD8~Cul1(ctd)-Rbx1 relative to their unmodified counterparts. In NEDD8ylated CRL structures, the cullin WHB and Rbx1 RING subdomains are dramatically reoriented, eliminating a CAND1-binding site and imparting multiple potential catalytic geometries to an associated E2. Biochemical analyses indicate that the structural malleability is important for both CRL NEDD8ylation and subsequent ubiquitination activities. Thus, our results point to a conformational control of CRL activity, with ligation of NEDD8 shifting equilibria to disfavor inactive CAND1-bound closed architectures, and favor dynamic, open forms that promote polyubiquitination.

26950370|a|Post-translational modification of proteins by ubiquitin (Ub) and Ub-like modifiers regulates DNA replication. We have previously shown that chromatin around replisomes is rich in SUMO and poor in Ub, whereas mature chromatin exhibits an opposite pattern. How this SUMO-rich, Ub-poor environment is maintained at sites of DNA replication in mammalian cells remains unexplored. Here we identify USP7 as a replisome-enriched SUMO deubiquitinase that is essential for DNA replication. By acting on SUMO and SUMOylated proteins, USP7 counteracts their ubiquitination. Inhibition or genetic deletion of USP7 leads to the accumulation of Ub on SUMOylated proteins, which are displaced away from replisomes. Our findings provide a model explaining the differential accumulation of SUMO and Ub at replication forks and identify an essential role of USP7 in DNA replication that should be considered in the development of USP7 inhibitors as anticancer agents. 

17024177|a|Hypoxia promotes genetic instability for tumor progression. Recent evidence indicates that the transcription factor HIF-1alpha impairs DNA mismatch repair, yet the role of HIF-1alpha isoform, HIF-2alpha, in tumor progression remains obscure. In pursuit of the involvement of HIF-alpha in chromosomal instability, we report here that HIF-1alpha, specifically its PAS-B, induces DNA double-strand breaks at least in part by repressing the expression of NBS1, a crucial DNA repair gene constituting the MRE11A-RAD50-NBS1 complex. Despite strong similarities between the two isoforms, HIF-2alpha fails to do so. We demonstrate that this functional distinction stems from phosphorylation of HIF-2alpha Thr-324 by protein kinase D1, which discriminates between subtle differences of the two PAS-B in amino-acid sequence, thereby precluding NBS1 repression. Hence, our findings delineate a molecular pathway that functionally distinguishes HIF-1alpha from HIF-2alpha, and arguing a unique role for HIF-1alpha in tumor progression by promoting genomic instability.

16893970|a|Receptor endocytosis is a fundamental step in controlling the magnitude, duration, and nature of cell signaling events. Confluent endothelial cells are contact inhibited in their growth and respond poorly to the proliferative signals of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). In a previous study, we found that the association of vascular endothelial cadherin (VEC) with VEGF receptor (VEGFR) type 2 contributes to density-dependent growth inhibition (Lampugnani, G.M., A. Zanetti, M. Corada, T. Takahashi, G. Balconi, F. Breviario, F. Orsenigo, A. Cattelino, R. Kemler, T.O. Daniel, and E. Dejana. 2003. J. Cell Biol. 161:793-804). In the present study, we describe the mechanism through which VEC reduces VEGFR-2 signaling. We found that VEGF induces the clathrin-dependent internalization of VEGFR-2. When VEC is absent or not engaged at junctions, VEGFR-2 is internalized more rapidly and remains in endosomal compartments for a longer time. Internalization does not terminate its signaling; instead, the internalized receptor is phosphorylated, codistributes with active phospholipase C-gamma, and activates p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation and cell proliferation. Inhibition of VEGFR-2 internalization reestablishes the contact inhibition of cell growth, whereas silencing the junction-associated density-enhanced phosphatase-1/CD148 phosphatase restores VEGFR-2 internalization and signaling. Thus, VEC limits cell proliferation by retaining VEGFR-2 at the membrane and preventing its internalization into signaling compartments.

16917507|a|Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) function as co-activators for a variety of sequence-specific transcription factors, including AML1. Here, we report that homeodomain-interacting protein kinase-2 (HIPK2) forms a complex with AML1 and p300, and phosphorylates both AML1 and p300 to stimulate transcription activation as well as HAT activities. Phosphorylation of p300 is triggered by phosphorylated AML1 as well as by PU.1, c-MYB, c-JUN and c-FOS, and is inhibited by dominant-negative HIPK2. Phosphorylation of p300 and AML1 is impaired in Hipk1/2 double-deficient mouse embryos. Double-deficient mice exhibit defects in primitive/definitive hematopoiesis, vasculogenesis, angiogenesis and neural tube closure. These phenotypes are in part similar to those observed in p300- and CBP-deficient mice. HIPK2 also phosphorylates another co-activator, MOZ, in an AML1-dependent manner. We discuss a possible mechanism by which transcription factors could regulate local histone acetylation and transcription of their target genes.

16840345|a|Viruses have to adjust to the host cell to guarantee their life cycle and survival. This aspect of the virus-host cell interaction is probably performed by viral proteins, such as serine-threonine kinases, that are present early during infection. Vaccinia virus has an early Ser-Thr kinase, B1R, which, although required for successful viral infection, is poorly characterized regarding its effects on cellular proteins, and thus, its potential contribution to pathogenesis is not known. Signaling by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) is mediated by the assembly of complexes between these kinases and the JIP scaffold proteins. To understand how vaccinia virus B1R can affect the host, its roles in the cellular signaling by MAPK complexes and c-Jun activation have been studied. Independently of its kinase activity, B1R can interact with the central region of the JIP1 scaffold protein. The B1R-JIP1 complex increases the amount of MAPK bound to JIP1; thus, MKK7 and TAK1 either bind with higher affinity or bind more stably to JIP1, while there is an increase in the phosphorylation state of JNK bound to JIP1. The functional consequence of these more stable interactions is an increase in the activity of transcription factors, such as c-Jun, that respond to these complexes. Furthermore, B1R is also able to directly phosphorylate c-Jun in residues different from those targeted by JNK and, thus, B1R can also cooperate by an independent route in c-Jun activation. Vaccinia virus B1R can thus modulate the signaling of pathways that respond to cellular stress.

16810323|a|Patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC) die because of chemoresistance. Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) increases the expression of antiapoptotic proteins, XIAP and Bcl-X(L), and triggers chemoresistance in SCLC cells. Here we show that these effects are mediated through the formation of a specific multiprotein complex comprising B-Raf, PKCepsilon and S6K2. S6K1, Raf-1 and other PKC isoforms do not form similar complexes. RNAi-mediated downregulation of B-Raf, PKCepsilon or S6K2 abolishes FGF-2-mediated survival. In contrast, overexpression of PKCepsilon increases XIAP and Bcl-X(L) levels and chemoresistance in SCLC cells. In a tetracycline-inducible system, increased S6K2 kinase activity triggers upregulation of XIAP, Bcl-X(L) and prosurvival effects. However, increased S6K1 kinase activity has no such effect. Thus, S6K2 but not S6K1 mediates prosurvival/chemoresistance signalling.

16888620|a|HER2 overexpression in cancers causes hyperactivation of the PI 3-kinase pathway and elevated levels of the chemokine receptor CXCR4, which is strongly associated with increased metastatic potential. Here, we provide evidence that the cytokine-independent survival kinase CISK is activated downstream of the PI 3-kinase-dependent kinase PDK1 on endosomes and negatively regulates the lysosomal degradation of CXCR4. We demonstrate that CISK prevents CXCR4 degradation by inhibiting sorting of the receptor from early endosomes to lysosomes. In contrast, CISK does not interfere with ligand-induced degradation of epidermal growth factor receptors. CISK strongly interacts and colocalizes with the E3 ubiquitin ligase AIP4, which is important for the ubiquitin-dependent lysosomal degradation of CXCR4. Moreover, the observed inhibition is both dependent on the interaction between CISK and AIP4 and on the activation status of CISK. Consistent with this, an activated form of CISK but not of the related kinase SGK1 phosphorylates specific sites of AIP4 in vitro. Taken together, these results reveal a critical function of CISK in specifically attenuating ubiquitin-dependent degradation of CXCR4, and provide a mechanistic link between the PI 3-kinase pathway and CXCR4 stability.

16794575|a|The protein kinase Chk2 (checkpoint kinase 2) is a major effector of the replication checkpoint. Chk2 activation is initiated by phosphorylation of Thr68, in the serine-glutamine/threonine-glutamine cluster domain (SCD), by ATM. The phosphorylated SCD-segment binds to the FHA domain of a second Chk2 molecule, promoting dimerisation of the protein and triggering phosphorylation of the activation segment/T-loop in the kinase domain. We have now determined the structure of the kinase domain of human Chk2 in complexes with ADP and a small-molecule inhibitor debromohymenialdisine. The structure reveals a remarkable dimeric arrangement in which T-loops are exchanged between protomers, to form an active kinase conformation in trans. Biochemical data suggest that this dimer is the biologically active state promoted by ATM-phosphorylation, and also suggests a mechanism for dimerisation-driven activation of Chk2 by trans-phosphorylation.

16763566|a|The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B (eIF4B) plays a critical role in recruiting the 40S ribosomal subunit to the mRNA. In response to insulin, eIF4B is phosphorylated on Ser422 by S6K in a rapamycin-sensitive manner. Here we demonstrate that the p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RSK) phosphorylates eIF4B on the same residue. The relative contribution of the RSK and S6K modules to the phosphorylation of eIF4B is growth factor-dependent, and the two phosphorylation events exhibit very different kinetics. The S6K and RSK proteins are members of the AGC protein kinase family, and require PDK1 phosphorylation for activation. Consistent with this requirement, phosphorylation of eIF4B Ser422 is abrogated in PDK1 null embryonic stem cells. Phosphorylation of eIF4B on Ser422 by RSK and S6K is physiologically significant, as it increases the interaction of eIF4B with the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3.

17022978|a|In avian smooth muscles, GTPgammaS produces a Rho kinase mediated increase in PHI-1 phosphorylation and force, but whether this correlation is causal is unknown. We examined the effect of phosphorylated PHI-1 (P-PHI-1) on force and myosin light chain (MLC(20)) phosphorylation at a constant [Ca(2+)]. P-PHI-1, but not PHI-1, increased MLC(20) phosphorylation and force, and phosphorylation of PHI-1 increased the interaction of PHI-1 with PP1c. Microcystin induced a dose-dependent reduction in the binding of PHI-1 to PP1c. These results suggest PHI-1 inhibits myosin light chain phosphatase by interacting with the active site of PP1c to produce a Ca(2+) independent increase in MLC(20) phosphorylation and force.

17006541|a|Regulation of E2F1-mediated apoptosis is essential for proper cellular growth. This control requires TopBP1, a BRCT (BRCA1 carboxyl-terminal) domain-containing protein, which interacts with E2F1 but not other E2Fs and represses its proapoptotic activity. We now show that the regulation of E2F1 by TopBP1 involves the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt signaling pathway, and is independent of pocket proteins. Akt phosphorylates TopBP1 in vitro and in vivo. Phosphorylation by Akt induces oligomerization of TopBP1 through its seventh and eighth BRCT domains. The Akt-dependent oligomerization is crucial for TopBP1 to interact with and repress E2F1. Akt phosphorylation is also required for interaction between TopBP1 and Miz1 or HPV16 E2, and repression of Miz1 transcriptional activity, suggesting a general role for TopBP1 oligomerization in the control of transcription factors. Together, this study defines a novel pathway involving PI3K-Akt-TopBP1 for specific control of E2F1 apoptosis, in parallel with cyclin-Cdk-Rb for general control of E2F activities.

16888623|a|The nonreceptor c-Abl tyrosine kinase binds to cytosolic 14-3-3 proteins and is targeted to the nucleus in the apoptotic response to DNA damage. The MUC1 oncoprotein is overexpressed by most human carcinomas and blocks the induction of apoptosis by genotoxic agents. Using human carcinoma cells with gain and loss of MUC1 function, we show that nuclear targeting of c-Abl by DNA damage is abrogated by a MUC1-dependent mechanism. The results demonstrate that c-Abl phosphorylates MUC1 on Tyr-60 and forms a complex with MUC1 by binding of the c-Abl SH2 domain to the pTyr-60 site. Binding of MUC1 to c-Abl attenuates phosphorylation of c-Abl on Thr-735 and the interaction between c-Abl and cytosolic 14-3-3. We also show that expression of MUC1 with a mutation at Tyr-60 (i) disrupts the interaction between MUC1 and c-Abl, (ii) relieves the MUC1-induced block of c-Abl phosphorylation on Thr-735 and binding to 14-3-3, and (iii) attenuates the MUC1 antiapoptotic function. These findings indicate that MUC1 sequesters c-Abl in the cytoplasm and thereby inhibits apoptosis in the response to genotoxic anticancer agents.

16938849|a|The mammalian Ste20-like Nck-interacting kinase (NIK) and its orthologs Misshapen in Drosophila and Mig-15 in Caenorhabditis elegans have a conserved function in regulating cell morphology, although through poorly understood mechanisms. We report two previously unrecognized actions of NIK: regulation of lamellipodium formation by growth factors and phosphorylation of the ERM proteins ezrin, radixin, and moesin. ERM proteins regulate cell morphology and plasma membrane dynamics by reversibly anchoring actin filaments to integral plasma membrane proteins. In vitro assays show that NIK interacts directly with ERM proteins, binding their N termini and phosphorylating a conserved C-terminal threonine. In cells, NIK and phosphorylated ERM proteins localize at the distal margins of lamellipodia, and NIK activity is necessary for phosphorylation of ERM proteins induced by EGF and PDGF, but not by thrombin. Lamellipodium extension in response to growth factors is inhibited in cells expressing a kinase-inactive NIK, suppressed for NIK expression with siRNA oligonucleotides, or expressing ezrin T567A that cannot be phosphorylated. These data suggest that direct phosphorylation of ERM proteins by NIK constitutes a signaling mechanism controlling growth factor-induced membrane protrusion and cell morphology.

16864798|a|Spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) ensures bipolar attachment of chromosomes to the mitotic spindle and is essential for faithful chromosome segregation, thereby preventing chromosome instability (CIN). Genetic evidence suggests a causal link between compromised SAC, CIN, and cancer. Bloom syndrome (BS) is a genetic disorder that predisposes affected individuals to cancer. BS cells exhibit elevated rates of sister chromatid exchange, chromosome breaks, and CIN. The BS gene product, BLM, is a member of the RecQ helicases that are required for maintenance of genome stability. The BLM helicase interacts with proteins involved in DNA replication, recombination, and repair and is required for the repair of stalled-replication forks and in the DNA damage response. Here we present biochemical evidence to suggest a role of BLM phosphorylation during mitosis in maintaining chromosome stability. BLM is associated with the SAC kinase MPS1 and is phosphorylated at S144 in a MPS1-dependent manner. Phosphorylated BLM interacts with polo-like kinase 1, a mitotic kinase that binds to phosphoserine/threonine through its polo-box domain (PBD). Furthermore, BS cells expressing BLM-S144A show normal levels of sister chromatid exchange but fail to maintain the mitotic arrest when SAC is activated and exhibit a broad distribution of chromosome numbers. We propose that MPS1-dependent BLM phosphorylation is important for ensuring accurate chromosome segregation, and its deregulation may contribute to cancer.

16757566|a|PKCepsilon has been shown to play a key role in the effect of the Gram-negative bacterial product LPS; however, the target for PKCepsilon in LPS signaling is unknown. LPS signaling is mediated by Toll-like receptor 4, which uses four adapter proteins, MyD88, MyD88 adapter-like (Mal), Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-beta (Trif), and Trif-related adapter molecule (TRAM). Here we show that TRAM is transiently phosphorylated by PKCepsilon on serine-16 in an LPS-dependent manner. Activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 and induction of the chemokine RANTES, which are both TRAM-dependent, were attenuated in PKCepsilon-deficient cells. TRAMS16A is inactive when overexpressed and is attenuated in its ability to reconstitute signaling in TRAM-deficient cells. We have therefore uncovered a key process in Toll-like receptor 4 signaling, identifying TRAM as the target for PKCepsilon.

16832045|a|Oxidative stress-responsive kinase (OSR) 1 and sterile20-related, proline-, alanine-rich kinase (SPAK) are Ste20p-related protein kinases that bind to the sodium, potassium, two chloride cotransporter, NKCC. Here we present evidence that the protein kinase with no lysine [K] (WNK) 1 regulates OSR1, SPAK, and NKCC activities. OSR1 exists in a complex with WNK1 in cells, is activated by recombinant WNK1 in vitro, and is phosphorylated in a WNK1-dependent manner in cells. Depletion of WNK1 from HeLa cells by using small interfering RNA reduces OSR1 kinase activity. In addition, depletion of either WNK1 or OSR1 reduces NKCC activity, indicating that WNK1 and OSR1 are both required for NKCC function. OSR1 and SPAK are likely links between WNK1 and NKCC in a pathway that contributes to volume regulation and blood pressure homeostasis in mammals.

16959610|a|The genetic mechanisms responsible for increased incidence of lymphoma in immunocompromised individuals have not been fully elucidated. We show that, in a line of TCR transgenic TG-B mice, an insertional mutation in one allele of the Epm2a locus and epigenetic silencing of another led to a high rate of lymphoma with early onset. Overexpressing Epm2a suppressed the growth of established tumor cells and the development of lymphoma in the TG-B mice, while specific silencing of the locus increased tumorigenesis in the immune-deficient host. Downregulation of Epm2a expression is widespread among mouse and human lymphoma cell lines. Epm2a-encoded laforin is a phosphatase for GSK-3beta and an important repressor in the Wnt signaling pathway. Inactivation of Epm2a resulted in increased Wnt signaling and tumorigenesis.

16899217|a|We recently identified a novel actin cytoskeleton-associated protein magicin, for merlin and Grb2 interacting cytoskeletal protein. To unravel the cellular functions of magicin, we used a yeast two-hybrid system and identified Fyn tyrosine kinase as a specific binding partner for magicin. Fyn phosphorylates magicin in vitro. In addition to Fyn, Src and Lck also interact with magicin. Upon stimulation with anti-CD3 antibody, magicin is phosphorylated in the T lymphocyte leukemia Jurkat cell line. Magicin phosphorylation is not observed in an Lck-deficient line, J.CaM1.6, indicating that Lck is the major Src family kinase for phosphorylating magicin in Jurkat cells. Employing site-directed mutagenesis along with in vitro kinase assays, we found that Y64 of magicin is phosphorylated by Lck creating a SH2-Grb2 binding motif. Magicin has also been identified as a Mediator subunit (MED28) in the nucleus involved in transcriptional regulation, therefore we propose that magicin may serve as a multi-faceted adaptor/scaffold to relay cellular signaling to the cytoskeleton and from the cytoskeleton to the nucleus.

16887178|a|Caspase activation has been extensively studied in the context of apoptosis. However, caspases also control other cellular functions, although the mechanisms regulating caspases in nonapoptotic contexts remain obscure. Drosophila IAP1 (DIAP1) is an endogenous caspase inhibitor that is crucial for regulating cell death during development. Here we describe Drosophila IKK-related kinase (DmIKKvarepsilon) as a regulator of caspase activation in a nonapoptotic context. We show that DmIKKvarepsilon promotes degradation of DIAP1 through direct phosphorylation. Knockdown of DmIKKvarepsilon in the proneural clusters of the wing imaginal disc, in which nonapoptotic caspase activity is required for proper sensory organ precursor (SOP) development, stabilizes endogenous DIAP1 and affects Drosophila SOP development. Our results demonstrate that DmIKKvarepsilon is a determinant of DIAP1 protein levels and that it establishes the threshold of activity required for the execution of nonapoptotic caspase functions.

16930133|a|Genetic screens in Drosophila have revealed that the serine/threonine kinase Hippo (Hpo) and the scaffold protein Salvador participate in a pathway that controls cell proliferation and apoptosis. Hpo most closely resembles the pro-apoptotic mammalian sterile20 kinases 1 and 2 (Mst1 and 2), and Salvador (Sav) has a human orthologue hSav (also called hWW45). Here we show that Mst and hSav heterodimerize in an interaction requiring the conserved C-terminal coiled-coil domains of both proteins. hSav was also able to homodimerize, but this did not require its coiled-coil domain. Coexpression of Mst and hSav led to phosphorylation of hSav and also increased its abundance. In vitro phosphorylation experiments indicate that the phosphorylation of Sav by Mst is direct. The stabilizing effect of Mst was much greater on N-terminally truncated hSav mutants, as long as they retained the ability to bind Mst. Mst mutants that lacked the C-terminal coiled-coil domain and were unable to bind to hSav, also failed to stabilize or phosphorylate hSav, whereas catalytically inactive Mst mutants that retained the ability to bind to hSav were still able to increase its abundance, although they were no longer able to phosphorylate hSav. Together these results show that hSav can bind to, and be phosphorylated by, Mst, and that the stabilizing effect of Mst on hSav requires its interaction with hSav but is probably not due to phosphorylation of hSav by Mst.

16837009|a|The p21-activated kinases (PAKs) are serine/threonine kinases that are involved in a wide variety of cellular functions including cytoskeletal motility, apoptosis, and cell cycle regulation. PAKs are inactivated by blockage of the active site of the kinase domain by an N-terminal regulatory domain. GTP-bound forms of Cdc42 and Rac bind to the regulatory domain and displace it, thereby allowing phosphorylation of the kinase domain and maximal activation. A key step in the activation process is the phosphorylation of the activation loop of one PAK kinase domain by another, but little is known about the underlying recognition events that make this phosphorylation specific. We show that the phosphorylated kinase domain of PAK2 dimerizes in solution and that this association is prevented by addition of a substrate peptide. We have identified a crystallographic dimer in a previously determined crystal structure of activated PAK1 in which two kinase domains are arranged face to face and interact through a surface on the large lobe of the kinase domain that is exposed upon release of the auto-inhibitory domain. The crystallographic dimer is suggestive of an engagement that mediates trans-autophosphorylation. Mutations at the predicted dimerization interface block dimerization and reduce the rate of autophosphorylation, supporting the role of this interface in PAK activation.

16963448|a|Claspin is a checkpoint protein involved in ATR (ataxia telangiectasia mutated- and Rad3-related)-dependent Chk1 activation in Xenopus and human cells. In Xenopus, Claspin interacts with Chk1 after DNA damage through a region containing two highly conserved repeats, which becomes phosphorylated during the checkpoint response. Because this region is also conserved in human Claspin, we investigated the regulation and function of these potential phosphorylation sites in human Claspin. We found that Claspin is phosphorylated in vivo at Thr-916 in response to replication stress and UV damage. Mutation of these phosphorylation sites on Claspin inhibited Claspin-Chk1 interaction in vivo, impaired Chk1 activation, and induced premature chromatin condensation in cells, indicating a defect in replication checkpoint. In addition, we found that Thr-916 on Claspin is phosphorylated by Chk1, suggesting that Chk1 regulates Claspin during checkpoint response. These results together indicate that phosphorylation of Claspin repeats in human Claspin is important for Claspin function and the regulation of Claspin-Chk1 interaction in human cells.

16938345|a|LAT is a linker protein essential for activation of T lymphocytes. Its rapid tyrosine-phosphorylation upon T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation recruits downstream signaling molecules for membrane targeting and activation. LAT is physically concentrated in cholesterol-enriched membrane microdomains and is known a substrate for Syk/Zap70 kinase. In this study, we demonstrate that LAT serves as a dual substrate for both Lck and Syk kinases. LAT phosphorylation is absent in Lck-deficient J.CaM1.6 cells and Lck is co-precipitated with LAT in pervanadate-activated Jurkat cells. Further, the in vitro kinase assay using purified Lck and LAT shows that Lck directly phosphorylates LAT. Both Lck and Syk, phosphorylate the ITAM-like motifs on LAT at Y171Y191, which is essential for induction of the interaction of LAT with downstream signaling molecules such as Grb2, PLC-gamma1 and c-Cbl, and for activation of MAPK-ERK. Collectively, our data indicate that LAT is an immediate substrate for Lck in one of the earliest events of T cell activation.

16862148|a|FilGAP is a newly recognized filamin A (FLNa)-binding RhoGTPase-activating protein. The GTPase-activating protein (GAP) activity of FilGAP is specific for Rac and FLNa binding targets FilGAP to sites of membrane protrusion, where it antagonizes Rac in vivo. Dominant-negative FilGAP constructs lacking GAP activity or knockdown of endogenous FilGAP by small interference RNA (siRNA) induce spontaneous lamellae formation and stimulate cell spreading on fibronectin. Knockdown of endogenous FilGAP abrogates ROCK-dependent suppression of lamellae. Conversely, forced expression of FilGAP induces numerous blebs around the cell periphery and a ROCK-specific inhibitor suppresses bleb formation. ROCK phosphorylates FilGAP, and this phosphorylation stimulates its RacGAP activity and is a requirement for FilGAP-mediated bleb formation. FilGAP is, therefore, a mediator of the well-established antagonism of Rac by RhoA that suppresses leading edge protrusion and promotes cell retraction to achieve cellular polarity.

16873060|a|The PML tumor suppressor controls key pathways for growth suppression, induction of apoptosis, and cellular senescence. PML loss occurs frequently in human tumors through unknown posttranslational mechanisms. Casein kinase 2 (CK2) is oncogenic and frequently upregulated in human tumors. Here we show that CK2 regulates PML protein levels by promoting its ubiquitin-mediated degradation dependent on direct phosphorylation at Ser517. Consequently, PML mutants that are resistant to CK2 phosphorylation display increased tumor-suppressive functions. In a faithful mouse model of lung cancer, we demonstrate that Pml inactivation leads to increased tumorigenesis. Furthermore, CK2 pharmacological inhibition enhances the PML tumor-suppressive property in vivo. Importantly, we found an inverse correlation between CK2 kinase activity and PML protein levels in human lung cancer-derived cell lines and primary specimens. These data identify a key posttranslational mechanism that controls PML protein levels and provide therapeutic means toward PML restoration through CK2 inhibition.

20118229|a|In response to DNA double strand breaks, the histone variant H2AX at the break site is phosphorylated at serine 139 by DNA damage sensor kinases such as ataxia telangiectasia-mutated, forming gamma-H2AX. This phosphorylation event is critical for sustained recruitment of other proteins to repair the break. After repair, restoration of the cell to a prestress state is associated with gamma-H2AX dephosphorylation and dissolution of gamma-H2AX-associated damage foci. The phosphatases PP2A and PP4 have previously been shown to dephosphorylate gamma-H2AX. Here, we demonstrate that the wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (WIP1) also dephosphorylates gamma-H2AX at serine 139 in vitro and in vivo. Overexpression of WIP1 reduces formation of gamma-H2AX foci in response to ionizing and ultraviolet radiation and blocks recruitment of MDC1 (mediator of DNA damage checkpoint 1) and 53BP1 (p53 binding protein 1) to DNA damage foci. Finally, these inhibitory effects of WIP1 on gamma-H2AX are accompanied by WIP1 suppression of DNA double strand break repair. Thus, WIP1 has a homeostatic role in reversing the effects of ataxia telangiectasia-mutated phosphorylation of H2AX.

20186153|a|AKT pathway has a critical role in mediating signaling transductions for cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. Previous studies have shown that AKT activation is achieved through a series of phosphorylation steps: first, AKT is phosphorylated at Thr-450 by JNK kinases to prime its activation; then, phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 phosphorylates AKT at Thr-308 to expose the Ser-473 residue; and finally, AKT is phosphorylated at Ser-473 by several kinases (PKD2 and others) to achieve its full activation. For its inactivation, the PH-domain containing phosphatases dephosphorylate AKT at Ser-473, and protein serine/threonine phosphatase-2A (PP-2A) dephosphorylates it at Thr-308. However, it remains unknown regarding which phosphatase dephosphorylates AKT at Thr-450 during its inactivation. In this study, we present both in vitro and in vivo evidence to show that protein serine/threonine phosphatase-1 (PP-1) is a major phosphatase that directly dephosphorylates AKT to modulate its activation. First, purified PP-1 directly dephosphorylates AKT in vitro. Second, immunoprecipitation and immunocolocalization showed that PP-1 interacts with AKT. Third, stable knock down of PP-1alpha or PP-1beta but not PP-1gamma, PP-2Aalpha or PP-2Abeta by shRNA leads to enhanced phosphorylation of AKT at Thr-450. Finally, overexpression of PP-1alpha or PP-1beta but not PP-1gamma, PP-2Aalpha or PP-2Abeta results in attenuated phosphorylation of AKT at Thr-450. Moreover, our results also show that dephosphorylation of AKT by PP-1 significantly modulates its functions in regulating the expression of downstream genes, promoting cell survival and modulating differentiation. These results show that PP-1 acts as a major phosphatase to dephosphorylate AKT at Thr-450 and thus modulate its functions.

20080742|a|We studied human cancer cell models in which we detected constitutive activation of ERK. A fraction of active ERK was found to be located in mitochondria in RWPE-2 cells, obtained by v-Ki-Ras transformation of the epithelial prostate RWPE-1 cell line; in metastatic prostate cancer DU145 cells; and in osteosarcoma SAOS-2 cells. All these tumor cells displayed marked resistance to death caused by apoptotic stimuli like arachidonic acid and the BH3 mimetic EM20-25, which cause cell death through the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP). PTP desensitization and the ensuing resistance to cell death induced by arachidonic acid or EM20-25 could be ablated by inhibiting ERK with the drug PD98059 or with a selective ERK activation inhibitor peptide. ERK inhibition enhanced glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3)-dependent phosphorylation of the pore regulator cyclophilin D, whereas GSK-3 inhibition protected from PTP opening. Neither active ERK in mitochondria nor pore desensitization was observed in non-transformed RWPE-1 cells. Thus, in tumor cells mitochondrial ERK activation desensitizes the PTP through a signaling axis that involves GSK-3 and cyclophilin D, a finding that provides a mechanistic basis for increased resistance to apoptosis of neoplastic cells.

20133640|a|Gram-negative bacteria deliver a cadre of virulence factors directly into the cytoplasm of eukaryotic host cells to promote pathogenesis and/or commensalism. Recently, families of virulence proteins have been recognized that function as E3 Ubiquitin-ligases. How these bacterial ligases integrate into the ubiquitin (Ub) signaling pathways of the host and how they differ functionally from endogenous eukaryotic E3s is not known. Here we show that the bacterial E3 SspH2 from S. typhimurium selectively binds the human UbcH5 ~ Ub conjugate recognizing regions of both UbcH5 and Ub subunits. The surface of the E2 UbcH5 involved in this interaction differs substantially from that defined for other E2/E3 complexes involving eukaryotic E3-ligases. In vitro, SspH2 directs the synthesis of K48-linked poly-Ub chains, suggesting that cellular protein targets of SspH2-catalyzed Ub transfer are destined for proteasomal destruction. Unexpectedly, we found that intermediates in SspH2-directed reactions are activated poly-Ub chains directly tethered to the UbcH5 active site (UbcH5 ~ Ub(n)). Rapid generation of UbcH5 ~ Ub(n) may allow for bacterially directed modification of eukaryotic target proteins with a completed poly-Ub chain, efficiently tagging host targets for destruction.

20080789|a|mTOR is a central regulator of cellular growth and metabolism. Using metabolic profiling and numerous small-molecule probes, we investigated whether mTOR affects immediate control over cellular metabolism by posttranslational mechanisms. Inhibiting the FKBP12/rapamycin-sensitive subset of mTOR functions in leukemic cells enhanced aerobic glycolysis and decreased uncoupled mitochondrial respiration within 25 min. mTOR is in a complex with the mitochondrial outer-membrane protein Bcl-xl and VDAC1. Bcl-xl, but not VDAC1, is a kinase substrate for mTOR in vitro, and mTOR regulates the association of Bcl-xl with mTOR. Inhibition of mTOR not only enhances aerobic glycolysis, but also induces a state of increased dependence on aerobic glycolysis in leukemic cells, as shown by the synergy between the glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxyglucose and rapamycin in decreasing cell viability.

20139300|a|Vasopressin's action in renal cells to regulate water transport depends on protein phosphorylation. Here we used mass spectrometry-based quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify signaling pathways involved in the short-term V2-receptor-mediated response in cultured collecting duct cells (mpkCCD) from mouse. Using Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) with two treatment groups (0.1 nM dDAVP or vehicle for 30 min), we carried out quantification of 2884 phosphopeptides. The majority (82%) of quantified phosphopeptides did not change in abundance in response to dDAVP. Analysis of the 273 phosphopeptides increased by dDAVP showed a predominance of so-called "basophilic" motifs consistent with activation of kinases of the AGC family. Increases in phosphorylation of several known protein kinase A targets were found. In addition, increased phosphorylation of targets of the calmodulin-dependent kinase family was seen, including autophosphorylation of calmodulin-dependent kinase 2 at T286. Analysis of the 254 phosphopeptides decreased in abundance by dDAVP showed a predominance of so-called "proline-directed" motifs, consistent with down-regulation of mitogen-activated or cyclin-dependent kinases. dDAVP decreased phosphorylation of both JNK1/2 (T183/Y185) and ERK1/2 (T183/Y185; T203/Y205), consistent with a decrease in activation of these proline-directed kinases in response to dDAVP. Both ERK and JNK were able to phosphorylate residue S261of aquaporin-2 in vitro, a site showing a decrease in phosphorylation in response to dDAVP in vivo. The data support roles for multiple vasopressin V2-receptor-dependent signaling pathways in the vasopressin signaling network of collecting duct cells, involving several kinases not generally accepted to regulate collecting duct function.

20126263|a|DNA damage checkpoints arrest cell cycle progression to facilitate DNA repair. The ability to survive genotoxic insults depends not only on the initiation of cell cycle checkpoints but also on checkpoint maintenance. While activation of DNA damage checkpoints has been studied extensively, molecular mechanisms involved in sustaining and ultimately inactivating cell cycle checkpoints are largely unknown. Here, we explored feedback mechanisms that control the maintenance and termination of checkpoint function by computationally identifying an evolutionary conserved mitotic phosphorylation network within the DNA damage response. We demonstrate that the non-enzymatic checkpoint adaptor protein 53BP1 is an in vivo target of the cell cycle kinases Cyclin-dependent kinase-1 and Polo-like kinase-1 (Plk1). We show that Plk1 binds 53BP1 during mitosis and that this interaction is required for proper inactivation of the DNA damage checkpoint. 53BP1 mutants that are unable to bind Plk1 fail to restart the cell cycle after ionizing radiation-mediated cell cycle arrest. Importantly, we show that Plk1 also phosphorylates the 53BP1-binding checkpoint kinase Chk2 to inactivate its FHA domain and inhibit its kinase activity in mammalian cells. Thus, a mitotic kinase-mediated negative feedback loop regulates the ATM-Chk2 branch of the DNA damage signaling network by phosphorylating conserved sites in 53BP1 and Chk2 to inactivate checkpoint signaling and control checkpoint duration.

20178747|a|Skeletal myogenesis, like hematopoiesis, occurs in successive developmental stages that involve different cell populations and expression of different genes. We show here that the transcription factor nuclear factor one X (Nfix), whose expression is activated by Pax7 in fetal muscle, in turn activates the transcription of fetal specific genes such as MCK and beta-enolase while repressing embryonic genes such as slow myosin. In the case of the MCK promoter, Nfix forms a complex with PKC theta that binds, phosphorylates, and activates MEF2A. Premature expression of Nfix activates fetal and suppresses embryonic genes in embryonic muscle, whereas muscle-specific ablation of Nfix prevents fetal and maintains embryonic gene expression in the fetus. Therefore, Nfix acts as a transcriptional switch from embryonic to fetal myogenesis.

20144759|a|As chronic inflammation is a hallmark of obesity, pathways that integrate nutrient- and pathogen sensing pathways are of great interest in understanding the mechanisms of insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, and other chronic metabolic pathologies. Here, we provide evidence that double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) can respond to nutrient signals as well as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and coordinate the activity of other critical inflammatory kinases such as the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) to regulate insulin action and metabolism. PKR also directly targets and modifies insulin receptor substrate and hence integrates nutrients and insulin action with a defined pathogen response system. Dietary and genetic obesity features marked activation of PKR in adipose and liver tissues and absence of PKR alleviates metabolic deterioration due to nutrient or energy excess in mice. These findings demonstrate PKR as a critical component of an inflammatory complex that responds to nutrients and organelle dysfunction.

20170641|a|Modification of proteins by ubiquitination plays important roles in various cellular processes. During this process, the target specificity is determined by ubiquitin ligases. Here we identify RNF220 (RING finger protein 220) as a novel ubiquitin ligase for Sin3B. As a conserved RING protein, RNF220 can bind E2 and mediate auto-ubiquitination of itself. Through a yeast two-hybrid screen, we isolated Sin3B as one of its targets, which is a scaffold protein of the Sin3/HDAC (histone deacetylase) corepressor complex. RNF220 specifically interacts with Sin3B both in vitro and in vivo. Sin3B can be regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Co-expression of RNF220 promotes the ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of Sin3B. Taken together, these results reveal a new mechanism for regulating the Sin3/HDAC complex.

20029029|a|Binding of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to its receptor leads to receptor dimerization, assembly of protein complexes, and activation of signaling networks that control key cellular responses. Despite their fundamental role in cell biology, little is known about protein complexes associated with the EGF receptor (EGFR) before growth factor stimulation. We used a modified membrane yeast two-hybrid system together with bioinformatics to identify 87 candidate proteins interacting with the ligand-unoccupied EGFR. Among them was histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a cytoplasmic lysine deacetylase, which we found negatively regulated EGFR endocytosis and degradation by controlling the acetylation status of alpha-tubulin and, subsequently, receptor trafficking along microtubules. A negative feedback loop consisting of EGFR-mediated phosphorylation of HDAC6 Tyr(570) resulted in reduced deacetylase activity and increased acetylation of alpha-tubulin. This study illustrates the complexity of the EGFR-associated interactome and identifies protein acetylation as a previously unknown regulator of receptor endocytosis and degradation.

20103772|a|Death-associated protein kinase (DAPK) provides a model for calcium-bound calmodulin (CaM)-dependent protein kinases (CaMKs). Here, we report the crystal structure of the binary DAPK-CaM complex, using a construct that includes the DAPK catalytic domain and adjacent autoregulatory domain. When DAPK was in a complex with CaM, the DAPK autoregulatory domain formed a long seven-turn helix. This DAPK-CaM module interacted with the DAPK catalytic domain through two separate domain-domain interfaces, which involved the upper and the lower lobe of the catalytic domain. When bound to DAPK, CaM adopted an extended conformation, which was different from that in CaM-CaMK peptide complexes. Complementary biochemical analysis showed that the ability of DAPK to bind CaM correlated with its catalytic activity. Because many features of CaM binding are conserved in other CaMKs, our findings likely provide a generally applicable model for regulation of CaMK activity.

22037600|a|Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling activates the inhibitor of transcription factor NF-κB (IκB) kinase (IKK) complex, which governs NF-κB-mediated transcription during inflammation. The RNase regnase-1 serves a critical role in preventing autoimmunity by controlling the stability of mRNAs that encode cytokines. Here we show that the IKK complex controlled the stability of mRNA for interleukin 6 (IL-6) by phosphorylating regnase-1 in response to stimulation via the IL-1 receptor (IL-1R) or TLR. Phosphorylated regnase-1 underwent ubiquitination and degradation. Regnase-1 was reexpressed in IL-1R- or TLR-activated cells after a period of lower expression. Regnase-1 mRNA was negatively regulated by regnase-1 itself via a stem-loop region present in the regnase-1 3' untranslated region. Our data demonstrate that the IKK complex phosphorylates not only IκBα, thereby activating transcription, but also regnase-1, thereby releasing a 'brake' on IL-6 mRNA expression.

22004763|a|The efficient processing of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag-Pol requires not only protease activity but also specific reverse transcriptase (RT) and integrase sequences. However, the critical amino acid residues of the HIV-1 Pol gene involved in protease-mediated Gag-Pol processing have not been precisely defined. Here, we found that the substitution of Thr-128 or Tyr-146 with Ala markedly impaired the proteolytic processing of the MA/CA, p66/p51 and RT/IN sites but did not affect the normal processing of other sites. Moreover, a Thr-128 or Tyr-146 mutation in RT abolished RT dimerization in vitro. These results suggest that Thr-128 and Tyr-146 within the RT region play important roles in protease-mediated Gag-Pol processing.

22020126|a|The MYST protein lysine acetyltransferases are evolutionarily conserved throughout eukaryotes and acetylate proteins to regulate diverse biological processes including gene regulation, DNA repair, cell-cycle regulation, stem cell homeostasis and development. Here, we demonstrate that MYST protein acetyltransferase activity requires active site lysine autoacetylation. The X-ray crystal structures of yeast Esa1 (yEsa1/KAT5) bound to a bisubstrate H4K16CoA inhibitor and human MOF (hMOF/KAT8/MYST1) reveal that they are autoacetylated at a strictly conserved lysine residue in MYST proteins (yEsa1-K262 and hMOF-K274) in the enzyme active site. The structure of hMOF also shows partial occupancy of K274 in the unacetylated form, revealing that the side chain reorients to a position that engages the catalytic glutamate residue and would block cognate protein substrate binding. Consistent with the structural findings, we present mass spectrometry data and biochemical experiments to demonstrate that this lysine autoacetylation on yEsa1, hMOF and its yeast orthologue, ySas2 (KAT8) occurs in solution and is required for acetylation and protein substrate binding in vitro. We also show that this autoacetylation occurs in vivo and is required for the cellular functions of these MYST proteins. These findings provide an avenue for the autoposttranslational regulation of MYST proteins that is distinct from other acetyltransferases but draws similarities to the phosphoregulation of protein kinases.

22110403|a|Differentiated mammary epithelium shows apicobasal polarity, and loss of tissue organization is an early hallmark of breast carcinogenesis. In BRCA1 mutation carriers, accumulation of stem and progenitor cells in normal breast tissue and increased risk of developing tumors of basal-like type suggest that BRCA1 regulates stem/progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation. However, the function of BRCA1 in this process and its link to carcinogenesis remain unknown. Here we depict a molecular mechanism involving BRCA1 and RHAMM that regulates apicobasal polarity and, when perturbed, may increase risk of breast cancer. Starting from complementary genetic analyses across families and populations, we identified common genetic variation at the low-penetrance susceptibility HMMR locus (encoding for RHAMM) that modifies breast cancer risk among BRCA1, but probably not BRCA2, mutation carriers: n = 7,584, weighted hazard ratio ((w)HR) = 1.09 (95% CI 1.02-1.16), p(trend) = 0.017; and n = 3,965, (w)HR = 1.04 (95% CI 0.94-1.16), p(trend) = 0.43; respectively. Subsequently, studies of MCF10A apicobasal polarization revealed a central role for BRCA1 and RHAMM, together with AURKA and TPX2, in essential reorganization of microtubules. Mechanistically, reorganization is facilitated by BRCA1 and impaired by AURKA, which is regulated by negative feedback involving RHAMM and TPX2. Taken together, our data provide fundamental insight into apicobasal polarization through BRCA1 function, which may explain the expanded cell subsets and characteristic tumor type accompanying BRCA1 mutation, while also linking this process to sporadic breast cancer through perturbation of HMMR/RHAMM.

22056988|a|The embryonic pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) isoform is highly expressed in human cancer. In contrast to the established role of PKM2 in aerobic glycolysis or the Warburg effect, its non-metabolic functions remain elusive. Here we demonstrate, in human cancer cells, that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation induces translocation of PKM2, but not PKM1, into the nucleus, where K433 of PKM2 binds to c-Src-phosphorylated Y333 of β-catenin. This interaction is required for both proteins to be recruited to the CCND1 promoter, leading to HDAC3 removal from the promoter, histone H3 acetylation and cyclin D1 expression. PKM2-dependent β-catenin transactivation is instrumental in EGFR-promoted tumour cell proliferation and brain tumour development. In addition, positive correlations have been identified between c-Src activity, β-catenin Y333 phosphorylation and PKM2 nuclear accumulation in human glioblastoma specimens. Furthermore, levels of β-catenin phosphorylation and nuclear PKM2 have been correlated with grades of glioma malignancy and prognosis. These findings reveal that EGF induces β-catenin transactivation via a mechanism distinct from that induced by Wnt/Wingless and highlight the essential non-metabolic functions of PKM2 in EGFR-promoted β-catenin transactivation, cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

22158122|a|NF-κB is crucial for innate immune defence against microbial infection. Inhibition of NF-κB signalling has been observed with various bacterial infections. The NF-κB pathway critically requires multiple ubiquitin-chain signals of different natures. The question of whether ubiquitin-chain signalling and its specificity in NF-κB activation are regulated during infection, and how this regulation takes place, has not been explored. Here we show that human TAB2 and TAB3, ubiquitin-chain sensory proteins involved in NF-κB signalling, are directly inactivated by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli NleE, a conserved bacterial type-III-secreted effector responsible for blocking host NF-κB signalling. NleE harboured an unprecedented S-adenosyl-l-methionine-dependent methyltransferase activity that specifically modified a zinc-coordinating cysteine in the Npl4 zinc finger (NZF) domains in TAB2 and TAB3. Cysteine-methylated TAB2-NZF and TAB3-NZF (truncated proteins only comprising the NZF domain) lost the zinc ion as well as the ubiquitin-chain binding activity. Ectopically expressed or type-III-secretion-system-delivered NleE methylated TAB2 and TAB3 in host cells and diminished their ubiquitin-chain binding activity. Replacement of the NZF domain of TAB3 with the NleE methylation-insensitive Npl4 NZF domain resulted in NleE-resistant NF-κB activation. Given the prevalence of zinc-finger motifs and activation of cysteine thiol by zinc binding, methylation of zinc-finger cysteine might regulate other eukaryotic pathways in addition to NF-κB signalling.

22056774|a|Herpesvirus-associated ubiquitin-specific protease (HAUSP) regulates the stability of p53 and the p53-binding protein MDM2, implicating HAUSP as a therapeutic target for tuning p53-mediated antitumor activity. Here we report the structural analysis of HAUSP with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus viral interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 4 (vIRF4) and the discovery of two vIRF4-derived peptides, vif1 and vif2, as potent and selective HAUSP antagonists. This analysis reveals a bilateral belt-type interaction that results in inhibition of HAUSP. The vif1 peptide binds the HAUSP TRAF domain, competitively blocking substrate binding, whereas the vif2 peptide binds both the HAUSP TRAF and catalytic domains, robustly suppressing its deubiquitination activity. Peptide treatments comprehensively blocked HAUSP, leading to p53-dependent cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in culture and to tumor regression in xenograft mouse model. Thus, the virus has developed a unique strategy to target the HAUSP-MDM2-p53 pathway, and these virus-derived short peptides represent biologically active HAUSP antagonists.

22065775|a|The inactivation of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway in many cancers often increases their resistance to anticancer therapy. Here we show that a previously proposed strategy directed to Wip1 inhibition could be ineffective in tumors lacking p53. On the contrary, Wip1 overexpression sensitized these tumors to chemotherapeutic agents. This effect was mediated through interaction between Wip1 and RUNX2 that resulted, in response to anticancer treatment, in RUNX2-dependent transcriptional induction of the proapoptotic Bax protein. The potentiating effects of Wip1 overexpression on chemotherapeutic agents were directed only to tumor cells lacking p53. The overexpression of Wip1 in normal tissues provided protection from cisplatin-induced apoptosis through decreased strength of upstream signaling to p53. Thus, Wip1 phosphatase promotes apoptosis in p53-negative tumors and protects normal tissues during treatment with anticancer agents.

22153498|a|p21-activated kinases (PAKs) play an important role in diverse cellular processes. Full activation of PAKs requires autophosphorylation of a critical threonine/serine located in the activation loop of the kinase domain. Here we report crystal structures of the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated PAK1 kinase domain. The phosphorylated PAK1 kinase domain has a conformation typical of all active protein kinases. Interestingly, the structure of the unphosphorylated PAK1 kinase domain reveals an unusual dimeric arrangement expected in an authentic enzyme-substrate complex, in which the activation loop of the putative "substrate" is projected into the active site of the "enzyme." The enzyme is bound to AMP-PNP and has an active conformation, whereas the substrate is empty and adopts an inactive conformation. Thus, the structure of the asymmetric homodimer mimics a trans-autophosphorylation complex, and suggests that unphosphorylated PAK1 could dynamically adopt both the active and inactive conformations in solution.

22094256|a|Cyclin D-dependent kinases (CDK4 and CDK6) are positive regulators of cell cycle entry and they are overactive in the majority of human cancers. However, it is currently not completely understood by which cellular mechanisms CDK4/6 promote tumorigenesis, largely due to the limited number of identified substrates. Here we performed a systematic screen for substrates of cyclin D1-CDK4 and cyclin D3-CDK6. We identified the Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor as a common critical phosphorylation target. CDK4/6 stabilize and activate FOXM1, thereby maintain expression of G1/S phase genes, suppress the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and protect cancer cells from senescence. Melanoma cells, unlike melanocytes, are highly reliant on CDK4/6-mediated senescence suppression, which makes them particularly susceptible to CDK4/6 inhibition.

22004453|a|Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease. An amino terminal cluster of constitutively phosphorylated residues, serines 860, 910, 935, 955, and 973, appears to be biologically relevant. Phosphorylation of serines 910 and 935 is regulated in response to LRRK2 kinase activity and is responsible for interaction with 14-3-3 and maintaining LRRK2 in a non-aggregated state. We examined the phosphorylation status of two other constitutive phosphorylation sites, serines 955 and 973. Treatment of LRRK2 expressing cells with the selective LRRK2 inhibitor LRRK2-IN1 revealed that, like Ser910/Ser935, phosphorylation of Ser955 and Ser973 is disrupted by acute inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity. Additionally, phosphorylation of Ser955 and 973 is disrupted in the context of several Parkinson's disease associated mutations [R1441G/C, Y1699C, and I2020T]. We observed that modification of Ser973 is dependent on the modification of Ser910/Ser935. Ser955Ala and Ser973Ala mutations do not induce relocalization of LRRK2; however, all phosphomutants exhibited similar localization patterns when exposed to LRRK2-IN1. We conclude that the mechanisms of regulation of Ser910/935/955/973 phosphorylation are similar and physiologically relevant. These sites can be utilized as biomarkers for LRRK2 activity as well as starting points for the elucidation of upstream and downstream enzymes that regulate LRRK2.

22113938|a|Deciphering the kinase-substrate relationship is vital for the study of phosphorylation network. The use of immobilized proteins on protein chip as the library for screening of potential kinase substrates is a tried-and-tested method. However, information on phosphorylation sites is lacking and the creation of the library with proteins of whole proteome by recombinant expression is costly and difficult. In this study, a new solid-phase approach by immobilization of proteins from cell lysate onto beads as a protein library for kinase substrate screening was developed. It was found that consensus phosphorylation sites motif for kinase substrates could be accurately determined and hundreds of in vitro kinase substrates and their phosphorylation sites could be identified by using this method.

22078878|a|Although eukaryotic nuclei contain distinct architectural structures associated with noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), their potential relationship to regulated transcriptional programs remains poorly understood. Here, we report that methylation/demethylation of Polycomb 2 protein (Pc2) controls relocation of growth-control genes between Polycomb bodies (PcGs) and interchromatin granules (ICGs) in response to growth signals. This movement is the consequence of binding of methylated and unmethylated Pc2 to the ncRNAs TUG1 and MALAT1/NEAT2, located in PcGs and ICGs, respectively. These ncRNAs mediate assembly of multiple corepressors/coactivators and can serve to switch mark recognition by "readers" of the histone code. Additionally, binding of NEAT2 to unmethylated Pc2 promotes E2F1 SUMOylation, leading to activation of the growth-control gene program. These observations delineate a molecular pathway linking the actions of subnuclear structure-specific ncRNAs and nonhistone protein methylation to relocation of transcription units in the three-dimensional space of the nucleus, thus achieving coordinated gene expression programs.

22000020|a|STAT6 plays a prominent role in adaptive immunity by transducing signals from extracellular cytokines. We now show that STAT6 is required for innate immune signaling in response to virus infection. Viruses or cytoplasmic nucleic acids trigger STING (also named MITA/ERIS) to recruit STAT6 to the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to STAT6 phosphorylation on Ser(407) by TBK1 and Tyr(641), independent of JAKs. Phosphorylated STAT6 then dimerizes and translocates to the nucleus to induce specific target genes responsible for immune cell homing. Virus-induced STAT6 activation is detected in all cell-types tested, in contrast to the cell-type specific role of STAT6 in cytokine signaling, and Stat6(-/-) mice are susceptible to virus infection. Thus, STAT6 mediates immune signaling in response to both cytokines at the plasma membrane, and virus infection at the endoplasmic reticulum.

10373560|a|The Myt1 protein kinase functions to negatively regulate Cdc2-cyclin B complexes by phosphorylating Cdc2 on threonine 14 and tyrosine 15. Throughout interphase, human Myt1 localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex, whereas Cdc2-cyclin B1 complexes shuttle between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Here we report that overproduction of either kinase-active or kinase-inactive forms of Myt1 blocked the nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of cyclin B1 and caused cells to delay in the G2 phase of the cell cycle. The COOH-terminal 63 amino acids of Myt1 were identified as a Cdc2-cyclin B1 interaction domain. Myt1 mutants lacking this domain no longer bound cyclin B1 and did not efficiently phosphorylate Cdc2-cyclin B1 complexes in vitro. In addition, cells overproducing mutant forms of Myt1 lacking the interaction domain exhibited normal trafficking of cyclin B1 and unperturbed cell cycle progression. These results suggest that the docking of Cdc2-cyclin B1 complexes to the COOH terminus of Myt1 facilitates the phosphorylation of Cdc2 by Myt1 and that overproduction of Myt1 perturbs cell cycle progression by sequestering Cdc2-cyclin B1 complexes in the cytoplasm.

10831594|a|We identified the multifunctional chaperon protein p32 as a protein kinase C (PKC)-binding protein interacting with PKCalpha, PKCzeta, PKCdelta, and PKC mu. We have analyzed the interaction of PKC mu with p32 in detail, and we show here in vivo association of PKC mu, as revealed from yeast two-hybrid analysis, precipitation assays using glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins, and reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation. In SKW 6.4 cells, PKC mu is constitutively associated with p32 at mitochondrial membranes, evident from colocalization with cytochrome c. p32 interacts with PKC mu in a compartment-specific manner, as it can be coimmunoprecipitated mainly from the particulate and not from the soluble fraction, despite the presence of p32 in both fractions. Although p32 binds to the kinase domain of PKC mu, it does not serve as a substrate. Interestingly, PKC mu-p32 immunocomplexes precipitated from the particulate fraction of two distinct cell lines, SKW 6.4 and 293T, show no detectable substrate phosphorylation. In support of a kinase regulatory function of p32, addition of p32 to in vitro kinase assays blocked, in a dose-dependent manner, aldolase but not autophosphorylation of PKC mu, suggesting a steric hindrance of substrate within the kinase domain. Together, these findings identify p32 as a novel, compartment-specific regulator of PKC mu kinase activity.

10393177|a|The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) of the MAP kinase superfamily is activated in response to a variety of cellular stresses and is involved in apoptosis in neurons. However, the roles of the JNK signaling pathway in the nervous system are unknown. The genes for the Caenorhabditis elegans homolog of JNK, JNK-1, and its direct activator, JKK-1, were isolated based on their abilities to function in the Hog1 MAP kinase pathway in yeast. JKK-1 is a member of the MAP kinase kinase superfamily and functions as a specific activator of JNK. Both jnk-1 and jkk-1 are expressed in most neurons. jkk-1 null mutant animals exhibit defects in locomotion that can be rescued by the conditional expression of JKK-1 in mutant adults, suggesting that the defect is not due to a developmental error. Furthermore, ectopic expression of JKK-1 in type-D motor neurons is sufficient to rescue the movement defect. Thus, the C.elegans JNK pathway functions in type-D GABAergic motor neurons and thereby modulates coordinated locomotion.

10849009|a|Phorbol esters reactivate Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) from latently infected cells via transcriptional activation of the viral immediate-early gene BZLF1. BZLF1 is a member of the extended AP-1 family of transcription factors that binds to specific BZLF1-binding motifs within early EBV promoters and to consensus AP-1 sites. Regulation of BZLF1's activity is achieved at the transcriptional level as well as through post-translational modifications. Recently, we reported that the transcriptional activity of BZLF1 is augmented by TPA [Baumann, M., Mischak, H., Dammeier, S., Kolch, W., Gires, O., Pich, D., Zeidler, R., Delecluse, H. J. & Hammerschmidt, W., (1998) J. Virol. 72, 8105-8114]. The increase of BZLF1's activity depends on a single serine residue (S186) that is phosphorylated by protein kinase C (PKC) in vitro and in vivo after stimulation with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Here, we identified RACK1 as a binding partner of BZLF1 in a yeast interaction trap assay. RACK stands for receptor of activated C-kinase and is involved in targeting activated PKCs and other signaling proteins. In vivo, RACK1 binds directly to the transactivation domain of BZLF1. Although a functional relationship between BZLF1 and PKC could be mediated by RACKs, RACK1 did not have a detectable effect on the phosphorylation status of BZLF1 in in vitro or in vivo phosphorylation assays. We suggest that RACK1 may act as a scaffolding protein on BZLF1 independently of activated PKCs.

22621922|a|Cellular responses to DNA damage require the formation of protein complexes in a highly organized fashion. The complete molecular components that participate in the sequential signaling response to DNA damage remain unknown. Here we demonstrate that vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) in resting cells plays an important role in the formation of ionizing radiation-induced foci that assemble on the 53BP1 scaffold protein during the DNA damage response. The kinase VRK1 is activated by DNA double strand breaks induced by ionizing radiation (IR) and specifically phosphorylates 53BP1 in serum-starved cells. VRK1 knockdown resulted in the defective formation of 53BP1 foci in response to IR both in number and size. This observed effect on 53BP1 foci is p53- and ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-independent and can be rescued with VRK1 mutants resistant to siRNA. VRK1 knockdown also prevented the activating phosphorylation of ATM, CHK2, and DNA-dependent protein kinase in response to IR. VRK1 activation in response to DNA damage is a novel and early step in the signaling of mammalian DNA damage responses.

10821867|a|Ligand stimulation of PDGF beta-receptors leads to autophosphorylation of the regulatory tyrosine 857 and of tyrosine residues that in their phosphorylated form serve as docking sites for Src homology 2 domain-containing proteins. Regulation of the PDGF beta-receptor by protein-tyrosine phosphatases is poorly understood. We have investigated PDGF beta-receptor dephosphorylation by receptor-like protein-tyrosine phosphatase DEP-1 using a cell line with inducible DEP-1 expression and by characterizing in vitro dephosphorylation of the PDGF beta-receptor and of receptor-derived phosphopeptides by DEP-1. After DEP-1 induction PDGF beta-receptor.DEP-1 complexes and reduced receptor tyrosine phosphorylation were observed. Phosphopeptide analysis of the PDGF beta-receptors from DEP-1-expressing cells and of the receptors dephosphorylated in vitro by DEP-1 demonstrated that dephosphorylation of autophosphorylation sites of the receptor differed and revealed that the regulatory Tyr(P)(857) was not a preferred site for DEP-1 dephosphorylation. When dephosphorylation of synthetic receptor-derived peptides was analyzed, the selectivity was reproduced, indicating that amino acid sequence surrounding the phosphorylation sites is the major determinant of selectivity. This notion is supported by the observation that the poorly dephosphorylated Tyr(P)(562) and Tyr(P)(857), in contrast to other analyzed phosphorylation sites, are surrounded by basic amino acid residues at positions -4 and +3 relative to the tyrosine residue. Our study demonstrates that DEP-1 dephosphorylation of the PDGF beta-receptor is site-selective and may lead to modulation, rather than general attenuation, of signaling.

10779557|a|hDlg, the human homologue of the Drosophila Discs-large (Dlg) tumor suppressor protein, is known to interact with the tumor suppressor protein APC and the human papillomavirus E6 transforming protein. In a two-hybrid screen, we identified a 322-aa serine/threonine kinase that binds to the PDZ2 domain of hDlg. The mRNA for this PDZ-binding kinase, or PBK, is most abundant in placenta and absent from adult brain tissue. The protein sequence of PBK has all the characteristic protein kinase subdomains and a C-terminal PDZ-binding T/SXV motif. In vitro, PBK binds specifically to PDZ2 of hDlg through its C-terminal T/SXV motif. PBK and hDlg are phosphorylated at mitosis in HeLa cells, and the mitotic phosphorylation of PBK is required for its kinase activity. In vitro, cdc2/cyclin B phosphorylates PBK. This evidence shows how PBK could link hDlg or other PDZ-containing proteins to signal transduction pathways regulating the cell cycle or cellular proliferation.

10521409|a|Recent investigations have elucidated the cytokine-induced NF-kappaB activation pathway. IkappaB kinase (IKK) phosphorylates inhibitors of NF-kappaB (IkappaBs). The phosphorylation targets them for rapid degradation through a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, allowing the nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB. We have examined the possibility that IKK can phosphorylate the p65 NF-kappaB subunit as well as IkappaB in the cytokine-induced NF-kappaB activation. In the cytoplasm of HeLa cells, the p65 subunit was rapidly phosphorylated in response to TNF-alpha in a time dependent manner similar to IkappaB phosphorylation. In vitro phosphorylation with GST-fused p65 showed that a p65 phosphorylating activity was present in the cytoplasmic fraction and the target residue was Ser-536 in the carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain. The endogenous IKK complex, overexpressed IKKs, and recombinant IKKbeta efficiently phosphorylated the same Ser residue of p65 in vitro. The major phosphorylation site in vivo was also Ser-536. Furthermore, activation of IKKs by NF-kappaB-inducing kinase induced phosphorylation of p65 in vivo. Our finding, together with previous observations, suggests dual roles for IKK complex in the regulation of NF-kappaB.IkappaB complex.

10724175|a|Mutations in the BRCA1 (ref. 1) tumour suppressor gene are found in almost all of the families with inherited breast and ovarian cancers and about half of the families with only breast cancer. Although the biochemical function of BRCA1 is not well understood, it is important for DNA damage repair and cell-cycle checkpoint. BRCA1 exists in nuclear foci but is hyperphosphorylated and disperses after DNA damage. It is not known whether BRCA1 phosphorylation and dispersion and its function in DNA damage response are related. In yeast the DNA damage response and the replication-block checkpoint are mediated partly through the Cds1 kinase family. Here we report that the human Cds1 kinase (hCds1/Chk2) regulates BRCA1 function after DNA damage by phosphorylating serine 988 of BRCA1. We show that hCds1 and BRCA1 interact and co-localize within discrete nuclear foci but separate after gamma irradiation. Phosphorylation of BRCA1 at serine 988 is required for the release of BRCA1 from hCds1. This phosphorylation is also important for the ability of BRCA1 to restore survival after DNA damage in the BRCA1-mutated cell line HCC1937.

10102273|a|Survival factors can suppress apoptosis in a transcription-independent manner by activating the serine/ threonine kinase Akt, which then phosphorylates and inactivates components of the apoptotic machinery, including BAD and Caspase 9. In this study, we demonstrate that Akt also regulates the activity of FKHRL1, a member of the Forkhead family of transcription factors. In the presence of survival factors, Akt phosphorylates FKHRL1, leading to FKHRL1's association with 14-3-3 proteins and FKHRL1's retention in the cytoplasm. Survival factor withdrawal leads to FKHRL1 dephosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and target gene activation. Within the nucleus, FKHRL1 triggers apoptosis most likely by inducing the expression of genes that are critical for cell death, such as the Fas ligand gene.

10751417|a|Previous studies suggested that protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) antagonizes insulin action by catalyzing dephosphorylation of the insulin receptor (IR) and/or other key proteins in the insulin signaling pathway. In adipose tissue and muscle of obese humans and rodents, PTP1B expression is increased, which led to the hypothesis that PTP1B plays a role in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. Consistent with this, mice in which the PTP1B gene was disrupted exhibit increased insulin sensitivity. To test whether increased expression of PTP1B in an insulin-sensitive cell type could contribute to insulin resistance, we overexpressed wild-type PTP1B in 3T3L1 adipocytes using adenovirus-mediated gene delivery. PTP1B expression was increased approximately 3-5-fold above endogenous levels at 16 h, approximately 14-fold at 40 h, and approximately 20-fold at 72 h post-transduction. Total protein-tyrosine phosphatase activity was increased by 50% at 16 h, 3-4-fold at 40 h, and 5-6-fold at 72 h post-transduction. Compared with control cells, cells expressing high levels of PTP1B showed a 50-60% decrease in maximally insulin-stimulated tyrosyl phosphorylation of IR and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) activity associated with IRS-1 or with phosphotyrosine. Akt phosphorylation and activity were unchanged. Phosphorylation of p42 and p44 MAP kinase (MAPK) was reduced approximately 32%. Overexpression of PTP1B had no effect on basal, submaximally or maximally (100 nm) insulin-stimulated glucose transport or on the EC(50) for transport. Our results suggest that: 1) insulin stimulation of glucose transport in adipocytes requires </=45% of maximal tyrosyl phosphorylation of IR or IRS-1 and <50% of maximal activation of PI3K, 2) a novel PI3K-independent pathway may play a role in insulin-induced glucose transport in adipocytes, and 3) overexpression of PTP1B alone in adipocytes does not impair glucose transport.

10415025|a|Leukocyte protein tyrosine phosphatase (LC-PTP)/hemopoietic PTP is a human cytoplasmic PTP that is predominantly expressed in the hemopoietic cells. Recently, it was reported that hemopoietic PTP inhibited TCR-mediated signal transduction. However, the precise mechanism of the inhibition was not identified. Here we report that extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) is the direct target of LC-PTP. LC-PTP dephosphorylated ERK2 in vitro. Expression of wild-type LC-PTP in 293T cells suppressed the phosphorylation of ERK2 by a mutant MEK1, which was constitutively active regardless of upstream activation signals. No suppression of the phosphorylation was observed by LC-PTPCS, a catalytically inactive mutant. In Jurkat cells, LC-PTP suppressed the ERK and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades. LC-PTP and LC-PTPCS made complexes with ERK1, ERK2, and p38alpha, but not with the gain-of-function sevenmaker ERK2 mutant (D321N). A small deletion (aa 1-46) in the N-terminal portion of LC-PTP or Arg to Ala substitutions at aa 41 and 42 resulted in the loss of ERK binding activity. These LC-PTP mutants revealed little inhibition of the ERK cascade activated by TCR cross-linking. On the other hand, the wild-type LC-PTP did not suppress the phosphorylation of sevenmaker ERK2 mutant. Thus, the complex formation of LC-PTP with ERK is the essential mechanism for the suppression. Taken collectively, these results indicate that LC-PTP suppresses mitogen-activated protein kinase directly in vivo.

10391250|a|c-Abl, a non-receptor tyrosine kinase, is activated by agents that damage DNA. This activation results in either arrest of the cell cycle in phase G1 or apoptotic cell death, both of which are dependent on the kinase activity of c-Abl. p73, a member of the p53 family of tumour-suppressor proteins, can also induce apoptosis. Here we show that the apoptotic activity of p73alpha requires the presence of functional, kinase-competent c-Abl. Furthermore, p73 and c-Abl can associate with each other, andthis binding is mediated by a PxxP motif in p73 and the SH3 domain of c-Abl. We find that p73 is a substrate of the c-Abl kinase and that the ability of c-Abl to phosphorylate p73 is markedly increased by gamma-irradiation. Moreover, p73 is phosphorylated in vivo in response to ionizing radiation. These findings define a pro-apoptotic signalling pathway involving p73 and c-Abl.

10660596|a|Regulation of the steady-state tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and its postreceptor substrates are essential determinants of insulin signal transduction. However, little is known regarding the molecular interactions that influence the balance of these processes, especially the phosphorylation state of postinsulin receptor substrates, such as insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). The specific activity of four candidate protein-tyrosine phosphatases (protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), SH2 domain-containing PTPase-2 (SHP-2), leukocyte common antigen-related (LAR), and leukocyte antigen-related phosphatase) (LRP) toward IRS-1 dephosphorylation was studied using recombinant proteins in vitro. PTP1B exhibited the highest specific activity (percentage dephosphorylated per microg per min), and the enzyme activities varied over a range of 5.5 x 10(3). When evaluated as a ratio of activity versus IRS-1 to that versus p-nitrophenyl phosphate, PTP1B remained significantly more active by 3.1-293-fold, respectively. Overlay blots with recombinant Src homology 2 domains of IRS-1 adaptor proteins showed that the loss of IRS-1 binding of Crk, GRB2, SHP-2, and the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase paralleled the rate of overall IRS-1 dephosphorylation. Further studies revealed that the adaptor protein GRB2 strongly promoted the formation of a stable protein complex between tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS-1 and catalytically inactive PTP1B, increasing their co-immunoprecipitation from an equimolar solution by 13.5 +/- 3.3-fold (n = 7; p < 0.01). Inclusion of GRB2 in a reaction mixture of IRS-1 and active PTP1B also increased the overall rate of IRS-1 tyrosine dephosphorylation by 2.7-3.9-fold (p < 0.01). These results provide new insight into novel molecular interactions involving PTP1B and GRB2 that may influence the steady-state capacity of IRS-1 to function as a phosphotyrosine scaffold and possibly affect the balance of postreceptor insulin signaling.

10588641|a|The docking and fusion of cargo-containing vesicles with target membranes of eukaryotic cells is mediated by the interaction of SNARE proteins present on both vesicle and target membranes. In many cases, the target membrane SNARE, or t-SNARE, exists as a complex of syntaxin with a member of the SNAP-25 family of palmitoylated proteins. We have identified a novel human kinase SNAK (SNARE kinase) that specifically phosphorylates the nonneuronal t-SNARE SNAP-23 in vivo. Interestingly, only SNAP-23 that is not assembled into t-SNARE complexes is phosphorylated by SNAK, and phosphorylated SNAP-23 resides exclusively in the cytosol. Coexpression with SNAK significantly enhances the stability of unassembled SNAP-23, and as a consequence, the assembly of newly synthesized SNAP-23 with syntaxin is augmented. These data demonstrate that phosphorylation of SNAP-23 by SNAK enhances the kinetics of t-SNARE assembly in vivo.

10698523|a|Axin forms a complex with adenomatous polyposis coli gene product (APC), glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), and beta-catenin through different binding sites and downregulates beta-catenin. GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of APC-(1211-2075) which has the Axin-binding site was facilitated by Axin, but that of APC-(959-1338) which lacks the Axin-binding site was not. Axin-(298-506) or Axin-(298-832), which has the GSK-3beta- and beta-catenin- but not APC-binding sites, did not enhance GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of either APC-(1211-2075) or APC-(959-1338). Furthermore, beta-catenin stimulated the phosphorylation of APC-(959-1338) and APC-(1211-2075) by GSK-3beta in the presence of Axin. Consistent with these in vitro observations, expression of beta-catenin or Axin in COS cells promoted an SDS gel band shift of APC. These results indicate that APC complexed with Axin is effectively phosphorylated by GSK-3beta and that beta-catenin may modulate this phosphorylation. In addition, the heterodimeric form of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) directly bound to Axin, and PP2A complexed with Axin dephosphorylated APC phosphorylated by GSK-3beta. Taken together, these results suggest that GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of APC can be modulated by beta-catenin and PP2A complexed with Axin.

10369126|a|Galectin-1 binds preferentially to N-acetyllactosamine residues on oligosaccharides associated with several cell surface glycoconjugates. In the present work, placental galectin-1 has been identified to be a natural ligand for the receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphatase CD45. The binding of galectin-1 to CD45 was detected by affinity chromatography of NP 40 solubilized Jurkat T cell membranes on galectin-1 agarose followed by immunoblotting of the galectin-1 agarose bound fraction applying monoclonal antibodies to CD45 isoforms. The PTPase activity of the galectin-1 agarose binding membrane fraction could be inhibited by sodium orthovanadate. Preincubation of Jurkat T cell membrane preparations with galectin-1 decreased the membrane-associated PTPase activity in a concentration-dependent manner. Incubation of Jurkat cells with galectin-1 suppressed the immunoprecipitated PTPase activity of CD45. Galectin-1 stimulates the cell surface expression of phosphatidylserine an early indicator of apoptosis. In CD45+ Jurkat T cells, galectin-1 induces higher levels of phosphatidylserine when compared with CD45- Jurkat cells. These observations indicate that galectin-1-mediated ligation of CD45 is involved in the induction of apoptosis in Jurkat T cells.

10617468|a|The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade is inactivated at the level of MAP kinase by members of the MAP kinase phosphatase (MKP) family, including MKP-1. MKP-1 was a labile protein in CCL39 hamster fibroblasts; its degradation was attenuated by inhibitors of the ubiquitin-directed proteasome complex. MKP-1 was a target in vivo and in vitro for p42(MAPK) or p44(MAPK), which phosphorylates MKP-1 on two carboxyl-terminal serine residues, Serine 359 and Serine 364. This phosphorylation did not modify MKP-1's intrinsic ability to dephosphorylate p44(MAPK) but led to stabilization of the protein. These results illustrate the importance of regulated protein degradation in the control of mitogenic signaling.

10864201|a|ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) gene plays a central role in the DNA-damage response pathway. We characterized the ATM protein expression in immortalized cells from AT and AT-variant patients, and heterozygotes and correlated it with two ATM-dependent radiation responses, G1 checkpoint arrest and p53-Ser 15 phosphorylation. On Western blots, the full-length ATM protein was detected in eight of 18 AT cases, albeit at 1-32% of the normal levels, whereas a truncated ATM protein was detected in a single case, despite the prevalence among cases of truncation mutations. Of two ataxia without telangiectasia [A-(T)] cases, one expressed 20% and the other approximately 70% of the normal ATM levels. Noteworthy, among ten asymptomatic heterozygous carriers for AT, normal amounts of ATM protein were found in one and reduced by 40-50% in the remaining cases. The radiation-induced phosphorylation of p53 protein at serine 15, largely mediated by ATM kinase, was defective in AT, A(-T) and in 2/4 heterozygous carriers, while the G1 cell cycle checkpoint was disrupted in all AT and A(-T) cases, and in 3/10 AT heterozygotes. Altogether, our study shows that AT and A(-T) cases bearing truncation mutations of the ATM gene can produce modest amounts of full-length (and only rarely truncated) ATM protein. However, this limited expression of ATM protein provides no benefit regarding the ATM-dependent responses related to G1 arrest and p53-ser15 phosphorylation. Our study additionally shows that the majority of AT heterozygotes express almost halved levels of ATM protein, sufficient in most cases to normally regulate the ATM-dependent DNA damage-response pathway.

10480872|a|The protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP-1B is an important regulator of intracellular protein tyrosine phosphorylation, and is itself regulated by phosphorylation. We report that PTP-1B and its yeast analog, YPTP, are phosphorylated and activated by members of the CLK family of dual specificity kinases. CLK1 and CLK2 phosphorylation of PTP-1B in vitro activated the phosphatase activity approximately 3-5-fold using either p-nitrophenol phosphate, or tyrosine-phosphorylated myelin basic protein as substrates. Co-expression of CLK1 or CLK2 with PTP-1B in HEK 293 cells led to a 2-fold stimulation of phosphatase activity in vivo. Phosphorylation of PTP-1B at Ser(50) by CLK1 or CLK2 is responsible for its enzymatic activation. These findings suggest that phosphorylation at Ser(50) by serine threonine kinases may regulate the activation of PTP-1B in vivo. We also show that CLK1 and CLK2 phosphorylate and activate the S. cerevisiae PTP-1B family member, YPTP1. CLK1 phosphorylation of YPTP1 led to a 3-fold stimulation of phosphatase activity in vitro. We demonstrate that CLK phosphorylation of Ser(83) on YPTP1 is responsible for the activation of this enzyme. These findings demonstrate that the CLK kinases activate PTP-1B family members, and this phosphatase may be an important cellular target for CLK action.

10889023|a|Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) displays a preference for peptides containing acidic as well as aromatic/aliphatic residues immediately NH(2)-terminal to phosphotyrosine. The structure of PTP1B bound with DADEpYL-NH(2) (EGFR(988)(-)(993)) offers a structural explanation for PTP1B's preference for acidic residues [Jia, Z., Barford, D., Flint, A. J., and Tonks, N. K. (1995) Science 268, 1754-1758]. We report here the crystal structures of PTP1B in complex with Ac-ELEFpYMDYE-NH(2) (PTP1B.Con) and Ac-DAD(Bpa)pYLIPQQG (PTP1B.Bpa) determined to 1.8 and 1.9 A resolution, respectively. A structural analysis of PTP1B.Con and PTP1B.Bpa shows how aromatic/aliphatic residues at the -1 and -3 positions of peptide substrates are accommodated by PTP1B. A comparison of the structures of PTP1B.Con and PTP1B.Bpa with that of PTP1B.EGFR(988)(-)(993) reveals the structural basis for the plasticity of PTP1B substrate recognition. PTP1B is able to bind phosphopeptides by utilizing common interactions involving the aromatic ring and phosphate moiety of phosphotyrosine itself, two conserved hydrogen bonds between the Asp48 carboxylate side chain and the main chain nitrogens of the pTyr and residue 1, and a third between the main chain nitrogen of Arg47 and the main chain carbonyl of residue -2. The ability of PTP1B to accommodate both acidic and hydrophobic residues immediately NH(2)-terminal to pTyr appears to be conferred upon PTP1B by a single residue, Arg47. Depending on the nature of the NH(2)-terminal amino acids, the side chain of Arg47 can adopt one of two different conformations, generating two sets of distinct peptide binding surfaces. When an acidic residue is positioned at position -1, a preference for a second acidic residue is also observed at position -2. However, when a large hydrophobic group occupies position -1, Arg47 adopts a new conformation so that it can participate in hydrophobic interactions with both positions -1 and -3.

10748127|a|Src homology 3 (SH3) and WW domains are known to associate with proline-rich motifs within their respective ligands. Here we demonstrate that the proposed adapter protein for Src kinases, Sam68, is a ligand whose proline-rich motifs interact with the SH3 domains of p59(fyn) and phospholipase Cgamma-1 as well as with the WW domains of FBP30 and FBP21. These proline-rich motifs, in turn, are flanked by RG repeats that represent targets for the type I protein arginine N-methyltransferase. The asymmetrical dimethylation of arginine residues within these RG repeats dramatically reduces the binding of the SH3 domains of p59(fyn) and phospholipase Cgamma-1, but has no effect on their binding to the WW domain of FBP30. These results suggest that protein arginine methylation can selectively modulate certain protein-protein interactions and that mechanisms exist for the irreversible regulation of SH3 domain-mediated interactions.

10366608|a|Recent studies have suggested that protein phosphorylation of glutamate receptors may play an important role in synaptic transmission. Specifically, the phosphorylation of AMPA receptors has been implicated in cellular models of synaptic plasticity. The phosphorylation of the glutamate receptor 1 (GluR1) subunit of AMPA receptors by protein kinase A (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC), and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) has been characterized extensively. Phosphorylation of this subunit occurs exclusively on the intracellular C-terminal domain. However, the GluR1 subunit C terminus shows low homology to the other AMPA receptor subunits. In this paper we characterized the phosphorylation of AMPA receptor subunit GluR4, using site-specific mutagenesis and biochemical techniques. We found that GluR4 is phosphorylated on serine 842 within the C-terminal domain in vitro and in vivo. Serine 842 is phosphorylated by PKA, PKC, and CaMKII in vitro and is phosphorylated in transfected cells by PKA. Two-dimensional phosphopeptide analysis indicates that serine 842 is the major phosphorylation site on GluR4. In addition, we identified threonine 830 as a potential PKC phosphorylation site. These results suggest that GluR4, which is the most rapidly desensitizing AMPA receptor subunit, may be modulated by phosphorylation.

10066421|a|Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) is inactivated through dephosphorylation of tyrosyl and threonyl regulatory sites. In yeast, both dual-specificity and tyrosine-specific phosphatases are involved in dephosphorylation. In mammals, however, no tyrosine-specific phosphatase has been identified molecularly to dephosphorylate MAPK in vivo. Recently, we and others have cloned a murine tyrosine-specific phosphatase, PTPBR7/PTP-SL, which is expressed predominantly in the brain. Here we report inactivation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) family MAPK by PTPBR7. PTPBR7 made complexes with ERK1/ERK2 in vivo and dephosphorylated ERK1 in vitro. When overexpressed in mammalian cells, wild-type PTPBR7 suppressed the phosphorylation and activation of ERK by epidermal growth factor (EGF), nerve growth factor (NGF), and constitutively active MEK1, a mutant MAPK kinase. In contrast, catalytically inactive and ERK-binding-deficient mutants revealed little inhibition on the ERK cascade. These results indicate that PTPBR7 suppresses MAPK directly in vivo.

10783163|a|Werner syndrome (WS) is the hallmark premature aging disorder in which affected humans appear older than their chronological age. The protein WRNp, defective in WS, has helicase function, DNA-dependent ATPase, and exonuclease activity. Although WRNp functions in nucleic acid metabolism, there is little or no information about the pathways or protein interactions in which it participates. Here we identify Ku70 and Ku86 as proteins that interact with WRNp. Although Ku proteins had no effect on ATPase or helicase activity, they strongly stimulated specific exonuclease activity. These results suggest that WRNp and the Ku complex participate in a common DNA metabolic pathway.

10559936|a|Extracellular signals regulate actin dynamics through small GTPases of the Rho/Rac/Cdc42 (p21) family. Here we show that p21-activated kinase (Pak1) phosphorylates LIM-kinase at threonine residue 508 within LIM-kinase's activation loop, and increases LIM-kinase-mediated phosphorylation of the actin-regulatory protein cofilin tenfold in vitro. In vivo, activated Rac or Cdc42 increases association of Pak1 with LIM-kinase; this association requires structural determinants in both the amino-terminal regulatory and the carboxy-terminal catalytic domains of Pak1. A catalytically inactive LIM-kinase interferes with Rac-, Cdc42- and Pak1-dependent cytoskeletal changes. A Pak1-specific inhibitor, corresponding to the Pak1 autoinhibitory domain, blocks LIM-kinase-induced cytoskeletal changes. Activated GTPases can thus regulate actin depolymerization through Pak1 and LIM-kinase.

10390359|a|Most isolates of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections are resistant to interferon, the only available therapy, but the mechanism underlying this resistance has not been defined. Here it is shown that the HCV envelope protein E2 contains a sequence identical with phosphorylation sites of the interferon-inducible protein kinase PKR and the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha, a target of PKR. E2 inhibited the kinase activity of PKR and blocked its inhibitory effect on protein synthesis and cell growth. This interaction of E2 and PKR may be one mechanism by which HCV circumvents the antiviral effect of interferon.

10383400|a|The protein kinase C (PKC) family has been clearly implicated in T-cell activation as have several nonreceptor protein-tyrosine kinases associated with the T-cell receptor, including p59fyn. This report demonstrates that thetaPKC and p59fyn specifically interact in vitro, in the yeast two-hybrid system, and in T-cells. Further indications of direct interaction are that p59fyn potentiates thetaPKC catalytic activity and that thetaPKC is a substrate for tyrosine phosphorylation by p59fyn. This interaction may account for the localization of thetaPKC following T-cell activation, pharmacological disruption of which results in specific cell-signaling defects. The demonstration of a physical interaction between a PKC and a protein-tyrosine kinase expands the class of PKC-anchoring proteins (receptors for activated C kinases (RACKs)) and demonstrates a direct connection between these two major T-cell-signaling pathways.

10733566|a|The activity of the NF-kappaB family of transcription factors is regulated principally by phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of their inhibitory IkappaB subunits. Site-specific serine phosphorylation of IkappaBs by two IkappaB kinases (IKKalpha [also known as CHUK] and IKKbeta) targets them for proteolysis. IKKalpha and -beta have a unique structure, with an amino-terminal serine-threonine kinase catalytic domain and carboxy-proximal helix-loop-helix (HLH) and leucine zipper-like (LZip) amphipathic alpha-helical domains. Here, we describe the properties of two novel cellular isoforms of IKKalpha: IKKalpha-DeltaH and IKKalpha-DeltaLH. IKKalpha-DeltaH and IKKalpha-DeltaLH are differentially spliced isoforms of the IKKalpha mRNA lacking its HLH domain and both its LZip and HLH domains, respectively. IKKalpha is the major RNA species in most murine cells and tissues, except for activated T lymphocytes and the brain, where the alternatively spliced isoforms predominate. Remarkably, IKKalpha-DeltaH and IKKalpha-DeltaLH, like IKKalpha, respond to tumor necrosis factor alpha stimulation to potentiate NF-kappaB activation in HEK293 cells. A mutant, catalytically inactive form of IKKalpha blocked IKKalpha-, IKKalpha-DeltaH-, and IKKalpha-DeltaLH-mediated NF-kappaB activation. Akin to IKKalpha, its carboxy-terminally truncated isoforms associated with the upstream activator NIK (NF-kappaB-inducing kinase). In contrast to IKKalpha, IKKalpha-DeltaLH failed to associate with either itself, IKKalpha, IKKbeta, or NEMO-IKKgamma-IKKAP1, while IKKalpha-DeltaH complexed with IKKbeta and IKKalpha but not with NEMO. Interestingly, each IKKalpha isoform rescued HEK293 cells from the inhibitory effects of a dominant-negative NEMO mutant, while IKKalpha could not. IKKalpha-DeltaCm, a recombinant mutant of IKKalpha structurally akin to IKKalpha-DeltaLH, was equally functional in these assays, but in sharp contrast, IKKbeta-DeltaCm, a structurally analogous mutant of IKKbeta, was inactive. Our results demonstrate that the functional roles of seemingly analogous domains in IKKalpha and IKKbeta need not be equivalent and can also exhibit different contextual dependencies. The existence of cytokine-inducible IKKalpha-DeltaH and IKKalpha-DeltaLH isoforms illustrates potential modes of NF-kappaB activation, which are not subject to the same in vivo regulatory constraints as either IKKalpha or IKKbeta.

10196197|a|Serine/arginine-rich (SR) proteins play an important role in constitutive and alternative pre-mRNA splicing. The C-terminal arginine-serine domain of these proteins, such as SF2/ASF, mediates protein-protein interactions and is phosphorylated in vivo. Using glutathione S-transferase (GST)-SF2/ASF-affinity chromatography, the SF2/ASF kinase activity was co-purified from HeLa cells with a 95-kDa protein, which was recognized by an anti-SR protein kinase (SRPK) 1 monoclonal antibody. Recombinant SRPK1 and SRPK2 bound to and phosphorylated GST-SF2/ASF in vitro. Phosphopeptide mapping showed that identical sites were phosphorylated in the pull-down kinase reaction with HeLa extracts and by recombinant SRPKs. Epitope-tagged SF2/ASF transiently expressed in COS7 cells co-immunoprecipitated with SRPKs. Deletion analysis mapped the phosphorylation sites to a region containing an (Arg-Ser)8 repeat beginning at residue 204, and far-Western analysis showed that the region is required for binding of SRPKs to SF2/ASF. Further binding studies showed that SRPKs bound unphosphorylated SF2/ASF but did not bind phosphorylated SF2/ASF. Expression of an SRPK2 kinase-inactive mutant caused accumulation of SF2/ASF in the cytoplasm. These results suggest that the formation of complexes between SF2/ASF and SRPKs, which is influenced by the phosphorylation state of SF2/ASF, may have regulatory roles in the assembly and localization of this splicing factor.

10749851|a|Arginine methylation is a common post-translation modification found in many proteins. Protein-arginine methyltransferase I (PRMT1) contributes >90% of type I protein-arginine methyltransferase activity in cells and tissues. To expand our knowledge on the regulation and role of PRMT1 in cells, we used the yeast two-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with PRMT1. One of the interacting proteins we cloned is interleukin enhancer-binding factor 3 (ILF3), also known as M phase phosphoprotein 4. ILF3 is closely related to nuclear factor 90 (NF90). Using an immunofluorescence analysis, we determined that ILF3 and PRMT1 co-localize in the nucleus. Moreover, PRMT1 and ILF3 co-precipitate in immunoprecipitation assays and can be isolated together in "pull-down" experiments using recombinant fusion proteins. ILF3 is a robust substrate for methylation by PRMT1 and can modulate PRMT1 activity in in vitro methylation assays. Deletion studies demonstrated that the COOH-terminal region of ILF3, which is rich in arginine, glycine, and serine, is responsible for the strong interaction between PRMT1 and ILF3 and is the site of ILF3 methylation by PRMT1. Although ILF3 and NF90 are highly similar, they differ in their carboxyl-terminal regions. Because of this difference, NF90 does not interact with PRMT1, is a much poorer substrate than ILF3 for PRMT1-dependent methylation, and does not modulate PRMT1 enzyme activity.

10481074|a|The Axin-dependent phosphorylation of beta-catenin catalysed by glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) is inhibited during embryogenesis. This protects beta-catenin against ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis, leading to its accumulation in the nucleus, where it controls the expression of genes important for development. Frequently rearranged in advanced T-cell lymphomas 1 (FRAT1) is a mammalian homologue of a GSK3-binding protein (GBP), which appears to play a key role in the correct establishment of the dorsal-ventral axis in Xenopus laevis. Here, we demonstrate that FRATtide (a peptide corresponding to residues 188-226 of FRAT1) binds to GSK3 and prevents GSK3 from interacting with Axin. FRATtide also blocks the GSK3-catalysed phosphorylation of Axin and beta-catenin, suggesting a potential mechanism by which GBP could trigger axis formation. In contrast, FRATtide does not suppress GSK3 activity towards other substrates, such as glycogen synthase and eIF2B, whose phosphorylation is independent of Axin but dependent on a 'priming' phosphorylation. This may explain how the essential cellular functions of GSK3 can continue, despite the suppression of beta-catenin phosphorylation.

26748711|a|Cyclin-dependent kinases regulate the cell cycle and transcription in higher eukaryotes. We have determined the crystal structure of the transcription kinase Cdk13 and its Cyclin K subunit at 2.0 Å resolution. Cdk13 contains a C-terminal extension helix composed of a polybasic cluster and a DCHEL motif that interacts with the bound ATP. Cdk13/CycK phosphorylates both Ser5 and Ser2 of the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) with a preference for Ser7 pre-phosphorylations at a C-terminal position. The peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 does not change the phosphorylation specificities of Cdk9, Cdk12, and Cdk13 but interacts with the phosphorylated CTD through its WW domain. Using recombinant proteins, we find that flavopiridol inhibits Cdk7 more potently than it does Cdk13. Gene expression changes after knockdown of Cdk13 or Cdk12 are markedly different, with enrichment of growth signaling pathways for Cdk13-dependent genes. Together, our results provide insights into the structure, function, and activity of human Cdk13/CycK. 

26869104|a|NBS1 is an early component in DNA-Damage Response (DDR) that participates in the initiation of the responses aiming to repair double-strand breaks caused by different mechanisms. Early steps in DDR have to react to local alterations in chromatin that are induced by DNA damage. NBS1 participates in the early detection of DNA damage and functions as a platform for the recruitment and assembly of components that are sequentially required for the repair process. In this work we have studied whether the VRK1 chromatin kinase can affect the activation of NBS1 in response to DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation. VRK1 is forming a basal preassembled complex with NBS1 in non-damaged cells. Knockdown of VRK1 resulted in the loss of NBS1 foci induced by ionizing radiation, an effect that was also detected in cell-cycle arrested cells and in ATM (-/-) cells. The phosphorylation of NBS1 in Ser343 by VRK1 is induced by either doxorubicin or IR in ATM (-/-) cells. Phosphorylated NBS1 is also complexed with VRK1. NBS1 phosphorylation by VRK1 cooperates with ATM. This phosphorylation of NBS1 by VRK1 contributes to the stability of NBS1 in ATM (-/-) cells, and the consequence of its loss can be prevented by treatment with the MG132 proteasome inhibitor of RNF8. We conclude that VRK1 regulation of NBS1 contributes to the stability of the repair complex and permits the sequential steps in DDR. 

26859459|a|Activation of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) induces mesenchymal (MES) transdifferentiation and radioresistance in glioma stem cells (GSCs), but molecular mechanisms for NF-κB activation in GSCs are currently unknown. Here, we report that mixed lineage kinase 4 (MLK4) is overexpressed in MES but not proneural (PN) GSCs. Silencing MLK4 suppresses self-renewal, motility, tumorigenesis, and radioresistance of MES GSCs via a loss of the MES signature. MLK4 binds and phosphorylates the NF-κB regulator IKKα, leading to activation of NF-κB signaling in GSCs. MLK4 expression is inversely correlated with patient prognosis in MES, but not PN high-grade gliomas. Collectively, our results uncover MLK4 as an upstream regulator of NF-κB signaling and a potential molecular target for the MES subtype of glioblastomas. 

26824392|a|Mutations in Park8, encoding for the multidomain Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) protein, comprise the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). G2019S, the most common amino acid substitution activates the kinase two- to threefold. This has motivated the development of LRRK2 kinase inhibitors; however, poor consensus on physiological LRRK2 substrates has hampered clinical development of such therapeutics. We employ a combination of phosphoproteomics, genetics, and pharmacology to unambiguously identify a subset of Rab GTPases as key LRRK2 substrates. LRRK2 directly phosphorylates these both in vivo and in vitro on an evolutionary conserved residue in the switch II domain. Pathogenic LRRK2 variants mapping to different functional domains increase phosphorylation of Rabs and this strongly decreases their affinity to regulatory proteins including Rab GDP dissociation inhibitors (GDIs). Our findings uncover a key class of bona-fide LRRK2 substrates and a novel regulatory mechanism of Rabs that connects them to PD. 

22439932|a|We and others previously identified NKX2-1, also known as TITF1 and TTF-1, as a lineage-survival oncogene in lung adenocarcinomas. Here we show that NKX2-1 induces the expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1), which in turn sustains a favorable balance between prosurvival PI3K-AKT and pro-apoptotic p38 signaling, in part through ROR1 kinase-dependent c-Src activation, as well as kinase activity-independent sustainment of the EGFR-ERBB3 association, ERBB3 phosphorylation, and consequential PI3K activation. Notably, ROR1 knockdown effectively inhibited lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, irrespective of their EGFR status, including those with resistance to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib. Our findings thus identify ROR1 as an "Achilles' heel" in lung adenocarcinoma, warranting future development of therapeutic strategies for this devastating cancer.

26711270|a|Ecdysoneless (ECD) is an evolutionarily conserved protein whose germ line deletion is embryonic lethal. Deletion of Ecd in cells causes cell cycle arrest, which is rescued by exogenous ECD, demonstrating a requirement of ECD for normal mammalian cell cycle progression. However, the exact mechanism by which ECD regulates cell cycle is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that ECD protein levels and subcellular localization are invariant during cell cycle progression, suggesting a potential role of posttranslational modifications or protein-protein interactions. Since phosphorylated ECD was recently shown to interact with the PIH1D1 adaptor component of the R2TP cochaperone complex, we examined the requirement of ECD phosphorylation in cell cycle progression. Notably, phosphorylation-deficient ECD mutants that failed to bind to PIH1D1 in vitro fully retained the ability to interact with the R2TP complex and yet exhibited a reduced ability to rescue Ecd-deficient cells from cell cycle arrest. Biochemical analyses demonstrated an additional phosphorylation-independent interaction of ECD with the RUVBL1 component of the R2TP complex, and this interaction is essential for ECD's cell cycle progression function. These studies demonstrate that interaction of ECD with RUVBL1, and its CK2-mediated phosphorylation, independent of its interaction with PIH1D1, are important for its cell cycle regulatory function. 

26763134|a|Bax-dependent mitochondrial permeabilization during apoptosis is controlled by multiple factors, including the phosphorylation by the protein kinase AKT. We used the heterologous co-expression of human Bax and AKT1 in yeast to investigate how the kinase modulates the different steps underlying Bax activation. We found that AKT activated Bax and increased its cellular content. Both effects were dependent on Ser184, but a phosphorylation of this residue did not fully explain the effects of AKT. Additional experiments with mutants substituted on Ser184 suggested that the regulation of Bax dynamic equilibrium between the cytosol and mitochondria might be more tightly regulated by Bcl-xL when Bax is phosphorylated. 

26823173|a|Coronins constitute a family of conserved proteins expressed in all eukaryotes that have been implicated in the regulation of a wide variety of cellular activities. Recent work showed an essential role for coronin 1 in the modulation of the cAMP/PKA pathway in neurons through the interaction of coronin 1 with the G protein subtype Gαs in a stimulus-dependent manner, but the molecular mechanism regulating coronin 1-Gαs interaction remains unclear. We here show that phosphorylation of coronin 1 on Thr(418/424) by cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 5 activity was responsible for coronin 1-Gαs association and the modulation of cAMP production. Together these results show an essential role for CDK5 activity in promoting the coronin 1-dependent cAMP/PKA pathway. 

26551075|a|Aberrant activation of the EGF receptor (EGFR) contributes to many human cancers by activating the Ras-MAPK pathway and other pathways. EGFR signaling is augmented by Src-family kinases, but the mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we show that human EGFR preferentially phosphorylates peptide substrates that are primed by a prior phosphorylation. Using peptides based on the sequence of the adaptor protein Shc1, we show that Src mediates the priming phosphorylation, thus promoting subsequent phosphorylation by EGFR. Importantly, the doubly phosphorylated Shc1 peptide binds more tightly than singly phosphorylated peptide to the Ras activator Grb2; this binding is a key step in activating the Ras-MAPK pathway. Finally, a crystal structure of EGFR in complex with a primed Shc1 peptide reveals the structural basis for EGFR substrate specificity. These results provide a molecular explanation for the integration of Src and EGFR signaling with downstream effectors such as Ras. 

26649818|a|Inactivation of the TNFAIP3 gene, encoding the A20 protein, is associated with critical inflammatory diseases including multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease. However, the role of A20 in attenuating inflammatory signalling is unclear owing to paradoxical in vitro and in vivo findings. Here we utilize genetically engineered mice bearing mutations in the A20 ovarian tumour (OTU)-type deubiquitinase domain or in the zinc finger-4 (ZnF4) ubiquitin-binding motif to investigate these discrepancies. We find that phosphorylation of A20 promotes cleavage of Lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains by the OTU domain and enhances ZnF4-mediated substrate ubiquitination. Additionally, levels of linear ubiquitination dictate whether A20-deficient cells die in response to tumour necrosis factor. Mechanistically, linear ubiquitin chains preserve the architecture of the TNFR1 signalling complex by blocking A20-mediated disassembly of Lys63-linked polyubiquitin scaffolds. Collectively, our studies reveal molecular mechanisms whereby A20 deubiquitinase activity and ubiquitin binding, linear ubiquitination, and cellular kinases cooperate to regulate inflammation and cell death. 

26751641|a|Prostate cancer evolution is driven by a combination of epigenetic and genetic alterations such as coordinated chromosomal rearrangements, termed chromoplexy. TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions found in human prostate tumors are a hallmark of chromoplexy. TMPRSS2-ERG fusions have been linked to androgen signaling and depend on androgen receptor (AR)-coupled gene transcription. Here, we show that dimethylation of KDM1A at K114 (to form K114me2) by the histone methyltransferase EHMT2 is a key event controlling androgen-dependent gene transcription and TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. We identified CHD1 as a KDM1A K114me2 reader and characterized the KDM1A K114me2-CHD1 recognition mode by solving the cocrystal structure. Genome-wide analyses revealed chromatin colocalization of KDM1A K114me2, CHD1 and AR in prostate tumor cells. Together, our data link the assembly of methylated KDM1A and CHD1 with AR-dependent transcription and genomic translocations, thereby providing mechanistic insight into the formation of TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions during prostate-tumor evolution. 

26829474|a|Faithful segregation of chromosomes in mammalian cells requires bi-orientation of sister chromatids, which relies on the sensing of correct attachments between spindle microtubules and kinetochores. Although the mechanisms underlying cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) activation, which triggers mitotic entry, have been extensively studied, the regulatory mechanisms that couple CDK1-cyclin B activity to chromosome stability are not well understood. Here, we identified a signaling axis in which Aurora B activity is modulated by CDK1-cyclin B via the acetyltransferase TIP60 in human cell division. CDK1-cyclin B phosphorylates Ser90 of TIP60, which elicits TIP60-dependent acetylation of Aurora B and promotes accurate chromosome segregation in mitosis. Mechanistically, TIP60 acetylation of Aurora B at Lys215 protects Aurora B's activation loop from dephosphorylation by the phosphatase PP2A to ensure a robust, error-free metaphase-anaphase transition. These findings delineate a conserved signaling cascade that integrates protein phosphorylation and acetylation with cell cycle progression for maintenance of genomic stability. 

17535800|a|POSH (Plenty of SH3 domains) binds to activated Rac and promotes apoptosis by acting as a scaffold to assemble a signal transduction pathway leading from Rac to JNK activation. Overexpression of POSH induces apoptosis in a variety of cell types, but apoptosis can be prevented by co-expressing the pro-survival protein kinase Akt. We report here that POSH is a direct substrate for phosphorylation by Akt in vivo and in vitro, and we identify a major site of Akt phosphorylation as serine 304 of POSH, which lies within the Rac-binding domain. We further show that phosphorylation of POSH results in a decreased ability to bind activated Rac, as does phosphomimetic S304D and S304E mutation of POSH. S304D mutant POSH also shows a strongly reduced ability to induce apoptosis. These findings identify a novel mechanism by which Akt promotes cell survival.

22632967|a|F-box proteins are the substrate binding subunits of SCF (Skp1-Cul1-F-box protein) ubiquitin ligase complexes. Using affinity purifications and mass spectrometry, we identified RRM2 (the ribonucleotide reductase family member 2) as an interactor of the F-box protein cyclin F. Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) catalyzes the conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs), which are necessary for both replicative and repair DNA synthesis. We found that, during G2, following CDK-mediated phosphorylation of Thr33, RRM2 is degraded via SCF(cyclin F) to maintain balanced dNTP pools and genome stability. After DNA damage, cyclin F is downregulated in an ATR-dependent manner to allow accumulation of RRM2. Defective elimination of cyclin F delays DNA repair and sensitizes cells to DNA damage, a phenotype that is reverted by expressing a nondegradable RRM2 mutant. In summary, we have identified a biochemical pathway that controls the abundance of dNTPs and ensures efficient DNA repair in response to genotoxic stress.

17513757|a|Activation of resting T lymphocytes initiates differentiation into mature effector cells over 3-7 days. The chemokine CCL5 (RANTES) and its major transcriptional regulator, Krüppel-like factor 13 (KLF13), are expressed late (3-5 days) after activation in T lymphocytes. Using yeast two-hybrid screening of a human thymus cDNA library, PRP4, a serine/threonine protein kinase, was identified as a KLF13-binding protein. Specific interaction of KLF13 and PRP4 was confirmed by reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation. PRP4 is expressed in PHA-stimulated human T lymphocytes from days 1 and 7 with a peak at day 3. Using an in vitro kinase assay, it was found that PRP4 phosphorylates KLF13. Furthermore, although phosphorylation of KLF13 by PRP4 results in lower binding affinity to the A/B site of the CCL5 promoter, coexpression of PRP4 and KLF13 increases nuclear localization of KLF13 and CCL5 transcription. Finally, knock-down of PRP4 by small interfering RNA markedly decreases CCL5 expression in T lymphocytes. Thus, PRP4-mediated phosphorylation of KLF13 plays a role in the regulation of CCL5 expression in T lymphocytes.

17481567|a|Considerable effort exists within drug discovery to develop novel compounds to improve the underlying metabolic defects in type 2 diabetes. One approach is focused on inhibition of the tyrosine phosphatase, PTP1B, an important negative regulator of both insulin and leptin signaling. Historically, tyrosine phosphatase assays have used either small organic phosphates or, alternatively, phosphorylated peptides from the target proteins themselves. In characterizing inhibitors of PTP1B, measuring turnover of small organic phosphates is limited to evaluation of compounds that bind the active site itself. Peptide substrates allow identification of additional subsets of inhibitors (e.g., those that bind the second aryl-phosphate site), but assays of peptide turnover often involve detection steps that then limit full kinetic evaluation of inhibitors. Here we use a polyclonal antibody specific for the phosphorylated insulin receptor to allow much more sensitive detection of peptide phosphorylation. This kinetically robust enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) gives k(cat) and K(m) values for a phosphorylated insulin receptor peptide consistent with values determined by a continuous fluorescence-based assay. Furthermore, IC50 values determined for well-behaved active site inhibitors agree well with values determined for p-nitrophenyl phosphate cleavage. This assay permits full characterization of a larger subset of inhibitors as drug candidates for this promising target.

17512525|a|Intraneuronal inclusions made of hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau are a defining neuropathological characteristic of Alzheimer's disease, and of several other neurodegenerative disorders. Many phosphorylation sites in tau are S/TP sites that flank the microtubule-binding repeats. Others are KXGS motifs in the repeats. One site upstream of the repeats lies in a consensus sequence for AGC kinases. This site (S214) is believed to play an important role in the events leading from normal, soluble to filamentous, insoluble tau. Here, we show that all AGC kinases tested phosphorylated S214. RSK1 and p70 S6 kinase also phosphorylated the neighbouring T212, a TP site that conforms weakly to the AGC kinase consensus sequence. MSK1 phosphorylated S214, as well as S262, a KXGS site in the first repeat, and S305 in the second repeat.

22439934|a|Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is the most prevalent esophageal cancer type in the United States. The TNF-α/mTOR pathway is known to mediate the development of EAC. Additionally, aberrant activation of Gli1, downstream effector of the Hedgehog (HH) pathway, has been observed in EAC. In this study, we found that an activated mTOR/S6K1 pathway promotes Gli1 transcriptional activity and oncogenic function through S6K1-mediated Gli1 phosphorylation at Ser84, which releases Gli1 from its endogenous inhibitor, SuFu. Moreover, elimination of S6K1 activation by an mTOR pathway inhibitor enhances the killing effects of the HH pathway inhibitor. Together, our results established a crosstalk between the mTOR/S6K1 and HH pathways, which provides a mechanism for SMO-independent Gli1 activation and also a rationale for combination therapy for EAC.

17476305|a|Steroid receptor coactivators (SRCs) exert profound effects on animal development and physiology. These coactivators are nuclear proteins and transcription co-regulators that function to facilitate the transcription initiation mediated by nuclear receptors, as well as by other well-known transcription factors. However, how these co-regulators are functionally regulated is poorly understood. During genome-wide screening for SRC-interacting proteins, we identified a novel ankyrin repeat containing protein, SIP (SRC-Interacting Protein), which interacts with SRC coactivators in the cytoplasm. We demonstrated that extracellular stimuli such as the addition of estrogen, induced phosphorylation of SIP in its PEST (Proline, Glutamate, Serine, and Threonine rich) domain by casein kinase II. The phosphorylation of SIP resulted in dissociation of SRC proteins from SIP in the cytoplasm and led to subsequent nuclear translocation of SRC proteins and gene coactivation. Both gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments indicate that SIP functions to sequester SRC coactivators in the cytoplasm and buffer the availability of these coactivators, thus providing a mechanism for the regulation of the transcription regulators.

17486097|a|AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK, also known as SNF1A) has been primarily studied as a metabolic regulator that is activated in response to energy deprivation. Although there is relatively ample information on the biochemical characteristics of AMPK, not enough data exist on the in vivo function of the kinase. Here, using the Drosophila model system, we generated the first animal model with no AMPK activity and discovered physiological functions of the kinase. Surprisingly, AMPK-null mutants were lethal with severe abnormalities in cell polarity and mitosis, similar to those of lkb1-null mutants. Constitutive activation of AMPK restored many of the phenotypes of lkb1-null mutants, suggesting that AMPK mediates the polarity- and mitosis-controlling functions of the LKB1 serine/threonine kinase. Interestingly, the regulatory site of non-muscle myosin regulatory light chain (MRLC; also known as MLC2) was directly phosphorylated by AMPK. Moreover, the phosphomimetic mutant of MRLC rescued the AMPK-null defects in cell polarity and mitosis, suggesting MRLC is a critical downstream target of AMPK. Furthermore, the activation of AMPK by energy deprivation was sufficient to cause dramatic changes in cell shape, inducing complete polarization and brush border formation in the human LS174T cell line, through the phosphorylation of MRLC. Taken together, our results demonstrate that AMPK has highly conserved roles across metazoan species not only in the control of metabolism, but also in the regulation of cellular structures.

17554339|a|Type 2 diabetes mellitus, a disease with significant effects on the health and economy of Western societies, involves disturbances in both lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. In the insulin-resistant or diabetic state, the liver is unresponsive to the actions of insulin with regard to the suppression of glucose output but continues to produce large amounts of lipid, the latter mimicking the fed, insulin-replete condition. The disordered distribution of lipids contributes to the cardiovascular disease that is the greatest cause of mortality of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Yet the precise signal transduction pathways by which insulin regulates hepatic lipid synthesis and degradation remain largely unknown. Here we describe a mechanism by which insulin, through the intermediary protein kinase Akt2/protein kinase B (PKB)-beta, elicits the phosphorylation and inhibition of the transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha), a global regulator of hepatic metabolism during fasting. Phosphorylation prevents the recruitment of PGC-1alpha to the cognate promoters, impairing its ability to promote gluconeogenesis and fatty acid oxidation. These results define a mechanism by which insulin controls lipid catabolism in the liver and suggest a novel site for therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus.

17517622|a|Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are crucial regulators of the eukaryotic cell cycle whose activities are controlled by associated cyclins. PFTK1 shares limited homology to CDKs, but its ability to associate with any cyclins and its biological functions remain largely unknown. Here, we report the functional characterization of human PFTK1 as a CDK. PFTK1 specifically interacted with cyclin D3 (CCND3) and formed a ternary complex with the cell cycle inhibitor p21(Cip1) in mammalian cells. We demonstrated that the kinase activity of PFTK1 depended on CCND3 and was negatively regulated by p21(Cip1). Moreover, we identified the tumor suppressor Rb as a potential downstream substrate for the PFTK1/CCND3 complex. Importantly, knocking down PFTK1 expression by using siRNA caused cell cycle arrest at G(1), whereas ectopic expression of PFTK1 promoted cell proliferation. Taken together, our data strongly suggest that PFTK1 acts as a CDK that regulates cell cycle progression and cell proliferation.

18449195|a|Single-strand DNA (ssDNA)-binding proteins (SSBs) are ubiquitous and essential for a wide variety of DNA metabolic processes, including DNA replication, recombination, DNA damage detection and repair. SSBs have multiple roles in binding and sequestering ssDNA, detecting DNA damage, stimulating nucleases, helicases and strand-exchange proteins, activating transcription and mediating protein-protein interactions. In eukaryotes, the major SSB, replication protein A (RPA), is a heterotrimer. Here we describe a second human SSB (hSSB1), with a domain organization closer to the archaeal SSB than to RPA. Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase phosphorylates hSSB1 in response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). This phosphorylation event is required for DNA damage-induced stabilization of hSSB1. Upon induction of DNA damage, hSSB1 accumulates in the nucleus and forms distinct foci independent of cell-cycle phase. These foci co-localize with other known repair proteins. In contrast to RPA, hSSB1 does not localize to replication foci in S-phase cells and hSSB1 deficiency does not influence S-phase progression. Depletion of hSSB1 abrogates the cellular response to DSBs, including activation of ATM and phosphorylation of ATM targets after ionizing radiation. Cells deficient in hSSB1 exhibit increased radiosensitivity, defective checkpoint activation and enhanced genomic instability coupled with a diminished capacity for DNA repair. These findings establish that hSSB1 influences diverse endpoints in the cellular DNA damage response.

18344974|a|There are several endocytic pathways, which are either dependent on or independent of clathrin. This study focuses on a poorly characterized mechanism-clathrin- and caveolae-independent endocytosis-used by the interleukin-2 receptor beta (IL-2R beta). We address the question of its regulation in comparison with the clathrin-dependent pathway. First, we show that Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 (Rac1) is specifically required for IL-2R beta entry, and we identify p21-activated kinases (Paks) as downstream targets. By RNA interference, we show that Pak1 and Pak2 are both necessary for IL-2R beta uptake, in contrast to the clathrin-dependent route. We observe that cortactin, a partner of actin and dynamin-two essential endocytic factors-is required for IL-2R beta uptake. Furthermore, we find that cortactin acts downstream from Paks, suggesting control of its function by these kinases. Thus, we describe a cascade composed of Rac1, Paks and cortactin specifically regulating IL-2R beta internalization. This study indicates Paks as the first specific regulators of the clathrin-independent endocytosis pathway.

22510882|a|Forkhead box-containing protein o (Foxo) 1 is a key transcription factor in insulin and glucose metabolism. We identified a Foxo1-CoRepressor (FCoR) protein in mouse adipose tissue that inhibits Foxo1's activity by enhancing acetylation via impairment of the interaction between Foxo1 and the deacetylase Sirt1 and via direct acetylation. FCoR is phosphorylated at Threonine 93 by catalytic subunit of protein kinase A and is translocated into nucleus, making it possible to bind to Foxo1 in both cytosol and nucleus. Knockdown of FCoR in 3T3-F442A cells enhanced expression of Foxo target and inhibited adipocyte differentiation. Overexpression of FCoR in white adipose tissue decreased expression of Foxo-target genes and adipocyte size and increased insulin sensitivity in Lepr(db/db) mice and in mice fed a high-fat diet. In contrast, Fcor knockout mice were lean, glucose intolerant, and had decreased insulin sensitivity that was accompanied by increased expression levels of Foxo-target genes and enlarged adipocytes. Taken together, these data suggest that FCoR is a novel repressor that regulates insulin sensitivity and energy metabolism in adipose tissue by acting to fine-tune Foxo1 activity.

18583988|a|Mammalian cells respond to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by recruiting DNA repair and cell-cycle checkpoint proteins to such sites. Central to these DNA damage response (DDR) events is the DNA damage mediator protein MDC1. MDC1 interacts with several DDR proteins, including the MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) complex. Here, we show that MDC1 is phosphorylated on a cluster of conserved repeat motifs by casein kinase 2 (CK2). Moreover, we establish that this phosphorylation of MDC1 promotes direct, phosphorylation-dependent interactions with NBS1 in a manner that requires the closely apposed FHA and twin BRCT domains in the amino terminus of NBS1. Finally, we show that these CK2-targeted motifs in MDC1 are required to mediate NBS1 association with chromatin-flanking sites of unrepaired DSBs. These findings provide a molecular explanation for the MDC1-MRN interaction and yield insights into how MDC1 coordinates the focal assembly and activation of several DDR factors in response to DNA damage.

18616943|a|Myelin basic protein (MBP) from multiple sclerosis (MS) patients contains lower levels of phosphorylation at Thr97 than normal individuals. The significance of phosphorylation at this site is not fully understood, but it is proposed to play a role in the normal functioning of MBP. Human Herpesvirus Type 6 encodes the protein U24, which has tentatively been implicated in the pathology of MS. U24 shares a 7 amino acid stretch encompassing the Thr97 phosphorylation site of MBP: PRTPPPS. We demonstrate using a combination of mass spectrometry, thin layer chromatography and autoradiography, that U24 can be phosphorylated at the equivalent threonine. Phospho-U24 may confound signalling or other pathways in which phosphorylated MBP may participate, precipitating a pathological process.

18486612|a|Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) plays a crucial role in mediating calcium signaling. Here, we demonstrate a method for screening substrates phosphorylated by human CaMKII delta using a wheat cell-free system. The cell-free mixture expressing CaMKII delta was incubated with HeLa extracts and radiolabeled ATP. From analysis of two-dimensional electrophoresis gels and mass spectrometry, two proteins were found. The cell-free based in vitro kinase assay revealed that CaMKII delta phosphorylates eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B and stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1), the latter on Ser189. Furthermore, constitutively-active CaMKII delta phosphorylated STIP1 in HeLa cells and dramatically promoted nuclear localization of STIP1, suggesting that calcium signals via CaMKII delta may regulate subcellular localization of STIP1. This approach may be a useful tool for target screening of protein kinases.

18593906|a|The serine/threonine kinase Pim is known to promote cell cycle progression and to inhibit apoptosis leading to tumorigenesis. However, the precise mechanisms remain unclear. We show, herein, that all the Pim family members (Pim1, Pim2, and Pim3) bind to and directly phosphorylate the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) at threonine-157 and threonine-198 residues in cells and in vitro. The Pim-mediated phosphorylation induced p27(Kip1) binding to 14-3-3 protein, resulting in its nuclear export and proteasome-dependent degradation. Ectopic expression of Pim kinases overcome the G(1) arrest mediated by wild-type p27(Kip1) but not by phosphorylation-resistant T157A-p27(Kip1) or T198A-p27(Kip1). In addition to the posttranslational regulations, p27(Kip1) promoter assay revealed that Pim kinases also had the ability to suppress p27(Kip1) transcription. Pim-mediated phosphorylation and inactivation of forkhead transcription factors, FoxO1a and FoxO3a, was involved in the transcriptional repression of the p27(Kip1) gene. In contrast, inhibition of Pim signaling by expressing the dominant-negative form of Pim1 increased nuclear p27(Kip1) level and attenuated cell proliferation. Because the CDK inhibitor p27(Kip1) plays a crucial role in tumor suppression by inhibiting abnormal cell cycle progression, Pim kinases promote cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis by down-regulating p27(Kip1) expression at both transcriptional and posttranslational levels.

18337751|a|The calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase that phosphorylates and inactivates eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2 kinase; eEF2K) is subject to multisite phosphorylation, which regulates its activity. Phosphorylation at Ser359 inhibits eEF2K activity even at high calcium concentrations. To identify the kinase that phosphorylates Ser359 in eEF2K, we developed an extensive purification protocol. Tryptic mass fingerprint analysis identified it as cdc2 (cyclin-dependent kinase 1). cdc2 co-purifies with Ser359 kinase activity and cdc2-cyclin B complexes phosphorylate eEF2K at Ser359. We demonstrate that cdc2 contributes to controlling eEF2 phosphorylation in cells. cdc2 is activated early in mitosis. Kinase activity against Ser359 in eEF2K also peaks at this stage of the cell cycle and eEF2 phosphorylation is low in mitotic cells. Inactivation of eEF2K by cdc2 may serve to keep eEF2 active during mitosis (where calcium levels rise) and thereby permit protein synthesis to proceed in mitotic cells. Amino-acid starvation decreases cdc2's activity against eEF2K, whereas loss of TSC2 (a negative regulator of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1(mTORC1)) increases it. These data closely match the control of Ser359 phosphorylation and indicate that cdc2 may be regulated by mTORC1.

18583960|a|TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is of central importance for the induction of type-I interferon (IFN) in response to pathogens. We identified the DEAD-box helicase DDX3X as an interaction partner of TBK1. TBK1 and DDX3X acted synergistically in their ability to stimulate the IFN promoter, whereas RNAi-mediated reduction of DDX3X expression led to an impairment of IFN production. Chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated that DDX3X is recruited to the IFN promoter upon infection with Listeria monocytogenes, suggesting a transcriptional mechanism of action. DDX3X was found to be a TBK1 substrate in vitro and in vivo. Phosphorylation-deficient mutants of DDX3X failed to synergize with TBK1 in their ability to stimulate the IFN promoter. Overall, our data imply that DDX3X is a critical effector of TBK1 that is necessary for type I IFN induction.

23822091|a|SRMS (Src-related tyrosine kinase lacking C-terminal regulatory tyrosine and N-terminal myristoylation sites) belongs to a family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, which also includes breast tumour kinase and Fyn-related kinase. SRMS, similar to breast tumour kinase and Fyn-related kinase, harbours a Src homology 3 and Src homology 2, as well as a protein kinase domain. However, unlike breast tumour kinase and Fyn-related kinase, SRMS lacks a C-terminal regulatory tail but distinctively possesses an extended N-terminal region. Both breast tumour kinase and Fyn-related kinase play opposing roles in cell proliferation and signalling. SRMS, however, is an understudied member of this family. Although cloned in 1994, information on the biochemical, cellular and physiological roles of SRMS remains unreported. The present study is the first to explore the expression pattern of SRMS in breast cancers, its enzymatic activity and autoregulatory elements, and the characterization of docking protein 1 as its first bonafide substrate. We found that, similar to breast tumour kinase, SRMS is highly expressed in most breast cancers compared to normal mammary cell lines and tissues. We generated a series of SRMS point and deletion mutants and assessed enzymatic activity, subcellular localization and substrate recognition. We report for the first time that ectopically-expressed SRMS is constitutively active and that its N-terminal region regulates the enzymatic activity of the protein. Finally, we present evidence indicating that docking protein 1 is a direct substrate of SRMS. Our data demonstrate that, unlike members of the Src family, the enzymatic activity of SRMS is regulated by the intramolecular interactions involving the N-terminus of the enzyme and that docking protein 1 is a bona fide substrate of SRMS.

18556656|a|Finding rapid, reversible down-regulation of human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) in LS180 cells following curcumin treatment led to the discovery that UGTs require phosphorylation. UGTs, distributed primarily in liver, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract, inactivate aromatic-like metabolites and a vast number of dietary and environmental chemicals, which reduces the risk of toxicities, mutagenesis, and carcinogenesis. Our aim here is to determine relevant kinases and mechanism(s) regulating phosphorylation of constitutive UGTs in LS180 cells and 10 different human UGT cDNA-transfected COS-1 systems. Time- and concentration-dependent inhibition of immunodetectable [(33)P]orthophosphate in UGTs and protein kinase Cepsilon (PKCepsilon), following treatment of LS180 cells with curcumin or the PKC inhibitor calphostin-C, suggested UGT phosphorylation is supported by active PKC(s). Immunofluorescent and co-immunoprecipitation studies with UGT-transfected cells showed co-localization of UGT1A7His and PKCepsilon and of UGT1A10His and PKCalpha or PKCdelta. Inhibition of UGT activity by PKCepsilon-specific antagonist peptide or by PKCepsilon-targeted destruction with PKCepsilon-specific small interference RNA and activation of curcumin-down-regulated UGTs with typical PKC agonists verified a central PKC role in glucuronidation. Moreover, in vitro phosphorylation of nascent UGT1A7His by PKCepsilon confirms it is a bona fide PKC substrate. Finally, catalase or herbimycin-A inhibition of constitutive or hydrogen peroxide-activated-UGTs demonstrated that reactive oxygen species-related oxidants act as second messengers in maintaining constitutive PKC-dependent signaling evidently sustaining UGT phosphorylation and activity. Because cells use signal transduction collectively to detect and respond appropriately to environmental changes, this report, combined with our earlier demonstration that specific phospho-groups in UGT1A7 determined substrate selections, suggests regulated phosphorylation allows adaptations regarding differential phosphate utilization by UGTs to function efficiently.

18408765|a|The forkhead box O (FOXO) transcription factor FOXO1 functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating expression of genes involved in apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and oxidative detoxification. Here, we demonstrate that cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) specifically phosphorylates FOXO1 at serine 249 (S249) in vitro and in vivo. Coimmunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that both endogenous CDK1 and ectopically expressed CDK1 form a protein complex with FOXO1 in prostate cancer (PCa) cells. In vitro protein binding assays reveal that CDK1 interacts directly with FOXO1. Accordingly, overexpression of CDK1 inhibits the transcriptional activity of FOXO1 in PCa cells through S249 phosphorylation on FOXO1. Consistent with the roles of FOXO3a and FOXO4 (two other members of the FOXO family) in cell cycle regulation, forced expression of FOXO1 causes a delay in the transition from G2 to M phase. This effect is blocked completely by overexpression of CDK1 and cyclin B1. Ectopic expression of constitutively active CDK1 also inhibits FOXO1-induced apoptosis in PCa cells. Moreover, we demonstrate that the inhibitory effect of FOXO1 on Ras oncogene-induced colony formation in fibroblasts is diminished by overexpression of CDK1. Given that CDK1 and cyclin B1 are often overexpressed in human cancers including PCa, our findings suggest that aberrant activation of CDK1 may contribute to tumorigenesis by promoting cell proliferation and survival via phosphorylation and inhibition of FOXO1.

18423204|a|Canonical Wnt signaling critically regulates cell fate and proliferation in development and disease. Nuclear localization of beta-catenin is indispensable for canonical Wnt signaling; however, the mechanisms governing beta-catenin nuclear localization are not well understood. Here we demonstrate that nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin in response to Wnt requires Rac1 activation. The role of Rac1 depends on phosphorylation of beta-catenin at Ser191 and Ser605, which is mediated by JNK2 kinase. Mutations of these residues significantly affect Wnt-induced beta-catenin nuclear accumulation. Genetic ablation of Rac1 in the mouse embryonic limb bud ectoderm disrupts canonical Wnt signaling and phenocopies deletion of beta-catenin in causing severe truncations of the limb. Finally, Rac1 interacts genetically with beta-catenin and Dkk1 in controlling limb outgrowth. Together these results uncover Rac1 activation and subsequent beta-catenin phosphorylation as a hitherto uncharacterized mechanism controlling canonical Wnt signaling and may provide additional targets for therapeutic intervention of this important pathway.

18485870|a|The activation of the tumor suppressor p53 facilitates the cellular response to genotoxic stress; however, the p53 response can only be executed if its interaction with its inhibitor Mdm2 is abolished. There have been conflicting reports on the question of whether p53 posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation or acetylation, are essential or only play a subtle, fine-tuning role in the p53 response. Thus, it remains unclear whether p53 modification is absolutely required for its activation. We have now identified all major acetylation sites of p53. Although unacetylated p53 retains its ability to induce the p53-Mdm2 feedback loop, loss of acetylation completely abolishes p53-dependent growth arrest and apoptosis. Notably, acetylation of p53 abrogates Mdm2-mediated repression by blocking the recruitment of Mdm2 to p53-responsive promoters, which leads to p53 activation independent of its phosphorylation status. Our study identifies p53 acetylation as an indispensable event that destabilizes the p53-Mdm2 interaction and enables the p53-mediated stress response.

18423203|a|CASK is a unique MAGUK protein that contains an N-terminal CaM-kinase domain besides the typical MAGUK domains. The CASK CaM-kinase domain is presumed to be a catalytically inactive pseudokinase because it lacks the canonical DFG motif required for Mg2+ binding that is thought to be indispensable for kinase activity. Here we show, however, that CASK functions as an active protein kinase even without Mg2+ binding. High-resolution crystal structures reveal that the CASK CaM-kinase domain adopts a constitutively active conformation that binds ATP and catalyzes phosphotransfer without Mg2+. The CASK CaM-kinase domain phosphorylates itself and at least one physiological interactor, the synaptic protein neurexin-1, to which CASK is recruited via its PDZ domain. Thus, our data indicate that CASK combines the scaffolding activity of MAGUKs with an unusual kinase activity that phosphorylates substrates recuited by the scaffolding activity. Moreover, our study suggests that other pseudokinases (10% of the kinome) could also be catalytically active.

18614016|a|The catalytic activity of the Src family of tyrosine kinases is suppressed by phosphorylation on a tyrosine residue located near the C terminus (Tyr 527 in c-Src), which is catalyzed by C-terminal Src Kinase (Csk). Given the promiscuity of most tyrosine kinases, it is remarkable that the C-terminal tails of the Src family kinases are the only known targets of Csk. We have determined the crystal structure of a complex between the kinase domains of Csk and c-Src at 2.9 A resolution, revealing that interactions between these kinases position the C-terminal tail of c-Src at the edge of the active site of Csk. Csk cannot phosphorylate substrates that lack this docking mechanism because the conventional substrate binding site used by most tyrosine kinases to recognize substrates is destabilized in Csk by a deletion in the activation loop.

12486103|a|Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a Caspase recruitment domain (ASC) belongs to a large family of proteins that contain a Pyrin, AIM, ASC, and death domain-like (PAAD) domain (also known as PYRIN, DAPIN, Pyk). Recent data have suggested that ASC functions as an adaptor protein linking various PAAD-family proteins to pathways involved in nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB and pro-Caspase-1 activation. We present evidence here that the role of ASC in modulating NF-kappaB activation pathways is much broader than previously suspected, as it can either inhibit or activate NF-kappaB, depending on cellular context. While coexpression of ASC with certain PAAD-family proteins such as Pyrin and Cryopyrin increases NF-kappaB activity, ASC has an inhibitory influence on NF-kappaB activation by various proinflammatory stimuli, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha, interleukin 1beta, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Elevations in ASC protein levels or of the PAAD domain of ASC suppressed activation of IkappaB kinases in cells exposed to pro-inflammatory stimuli. Conversely, reducing endogenous levels of ASC using siRNA enhanced TNF- and LPS-induced degradation of the IKK substrate, IkappaBalpha. Our findings suggest that ASC modulates diverse NF-kappaB induction pathways by acting upon the IKK complex, implying a broad role for this and similar proteins containing PAAD domains in regulation of inflammatory responses.

23809146|a|The function of many protein kinases is controlled by the phosphorylation of a critical tyrosine residue in the activation loop. Dual specificity tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated kinases (DYRKs) autophosphorylate on this tyrosine residue but phosphorylate substrates on aliphatic amino acids. This study addresses the mechanism of dual specificity kinase activity in DYRK1A and related kinases. Tyrosine autophosphorylation of DYRK1A occurred rapidly during in vitro translation and did not depend on the non-catalytic domains or other proteins. Expression in bacteria as well as in mammalian cells revealed that tyrosine kinase activity of DYRK1A is not restricted to the co-translational autophosphorylation in the activation loop. Moreover, mature DYRK1A was still capable of tyrosine autophosphorylation. Point mutants of DYRK1A and DYRK2 lacking the activation loop tyrosine showed enhanced tyrosine kinase activity. A series of structurally diverse DYRK1A inhibitors was used to pharmacologically distinguish different conformational states of the catalytic domain that are hypothesized to account for the dual specificity kinase activity. All tested compounds inhibited substrate phosphorylation with higher potency than autophosphorylation but none of the tested inhibitors differentially inhibited threonine and tyrosine kinase activity. Finally, the related cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinases (CLKs), which lack the activation loop tyrosine, autophosphorylated on tyrosine both in vitro and in living cells. We propose a model of DYRK autoactivation in which tyrosine autophosphorylation in the activation loop stabilizes a conformation of the catalytic domain with enhanced serine/threonine kinase activity without disabling tyrosine phosphorylation. The mechanism of dual specificity kinase activity probably applies to related serine/threonine kinases that depend on tyrosine autophosphorylation for maturation.

12799422|a|CrkII belongs to a family of adaptor proteins that become tyrosine phosphorylated after various stimuli. We examined the role of CrkII tyrosine phosphorylation in fibronectin-induced cell migration. Overexpression of CrkII inhibited dephosphorylation of focal adhesion components such as p130 Crk-associated substrate (p130cas) and paxillin by protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B). Tyrosine-phosphorylated CrkII was dephosphorylated by PTP1B both in vitro and in vivo, showing for the first time that PTP1B directly dephosphorylates CrkII. A CrkII mutant in which tyrosine residue 221 was substituted by phenylalanine (CrkII-Y221F) could not be tyrosine phosphorylated, and it showed significantly increased binding to p130cas and paxillin. Enhanced binding of CrkII to p130cas has been reported to promote cell migration. Nonphosphorylated CrkII-Y221F promoted HT1080 cell migration on fibronectin, whereas wild-type CrkII did not at moderate expression levels. Moreover, co-expression of CrkII and PTP1B promoted HT1080 cell migration on fibronectin and retained tyrosine phosphorylation and binding of p130cas to CrkII, whereas paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation was reduced. These findings support the concepts that CrkII binding activity is regulated by tyrosine kinases and phosphatases, and that tyrosine phosphorylation of CrkII can downmodulate cell migration mediated by the focal adhesion kinase/p130cas pathway.

12771128|a|Confluent endothelial cells respond poorly to the proliferative signals of VEGF. Comparing isogenic endothelial cells differing for vascular endothelial cadherin (VE-cadherin) expression only, we found that the presence of this protein attenuates VEGF-induced VEGF receptor (VEGFR) 2 phosphorylation in tyrosine, p44/p42 MAP kinase phosphorylation, and cell proliferation. VE-cadherin truncated in beta-catenin but not p120 binding domain is unable to associate with VEGFR-2 and to induce its inactivation. beta-Catenin-null endothelial cells are not contact inhibited by VE-cadherin and are still responsive to VEGF, indicating that this protein is required to restrain growth factor signaling. A dominant-negative mutant of high cell density-enhanced PTP 1 (DEP-1)//CD148 as well as reduction of its expression by RNA interference partially restore VEGFR-2 phosphorylation and MAP kinase activation. Overall the data indicate that VE-cadherin-beta-catenin complex participates in contact inhibition of VEGF signaling. Upon stimulation with VEGF, VEGFR-2 associates with the complex and concentrates at cell-cell contacts, where it may be inactivated by junctional phosphatases such as DEP-1. In sparse cells or in VE-cadherin-null cells, this phenomenon cannot occur and the receptor is fully activated by the growth factor.

12840032|a|The mechanism of senescence-associated cytoplasmic induction of p-Erk1/2 (SA-p-Erk1/2) proteins in human diploid fibroblasts was investigated. p-Erk1/2 proteins were efficiently dephosphorylated in vitro by protein phosphatases 1 and 2A (PP1/2A) and MAPK phosphatase 3 (MKP3). Specific activity of PP1/2A and MKP3 activity significantly decreased during cellular senescence, whereas their protein expression levels did not. To investigate possible mechanism of phosphatase inactivation, we measured reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis and found it was much higher in mid-old cells than the young cells. Treating the young cells once with 1 mm H2O2 remarkably induced p-Erk1/2 expression; however, it was transient unless repeatedly treated until 72 h. Multiple treatment of the cells with 0.2 mm H2O2 significantly duplicated inactivation of PP1/2A; however, thiol-specific reagents could reverse the PP1/2A activities, suggesting the oxidation of cysteine molecule in PP1/2A by the increased ROS. When the cells were pretreated with 10 mm N-acetyl-l-cysteine for 1 h, Erk1/2 activation was completely blocked. To elucidate which cysteine residue and/or metal ion in PP1/2A was modified by H2O2, electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry analyses were performed with purified PP1C-alpha and found Cys62-SO3H and Cys105-SO3H, implicating the tertiary structure perturbation. H2O2 inhibited purified PP1C-alpha activity by both oxidation of Cys residues and metal ion(s), evidenced by dithiothreitol and ascorbate-restoration assay. In summary, SA-p-Erk1/2 was most likely due to the oxidation of PP1/2A, which resulted from the continuous exposure of the cells to vast amounts of ROS generated during cellular senescence by oxidation of Cys62 and Cys105 in PP1C-alpha and metal ion(s).

12475979|a|The receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) DEP-1 (CD148/PTP-eta) has been implicated in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation, and transformation, and most recently has been identified as a potential tumor suppressor gene mutated in colon, lung, and breast cancers. We have generated constructs comprising the cytoplasmic segment of DEP-1 fused to the maltose-binding protein to identify potential substrates and thereby suggest a physiological function for DEP-1. We have shown that the substrate-trapping mutant form of DEP-1 interacted with a small subset of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins from lysates of the human breast tumor cell lines MDA-MB-231, T-47D, and T-47D/Met and have identified the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor Met, the adapter protein Gab1, and the junctional component p120 catenin as potential substrates. Following ligand stimulation, phosphorylation of specific tyrosyl residues in Met induces mitogenic, motogenic, and morphogenic responses. When co-expressed in 293 cells, the full-length substrate-trapping mutant form of DEP-1 formed a stable complex with the chimeric receptor colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF)-Met and wild type DEP-1 dephosphorylated CSF-Met. Furthermore, we observed that DEP-1 preferentially dephosphorylated a Gab1 binding site (Tyr(1349)) and a COOH-terminal tyrosine implicated in morphogenesis (Tyr(1365)), whereas tyrosine residues in the activation loop of Met (Tyr(1230), Tyr(1234), and Tyr(1235)) were not preferred targets of the PTP. The ability of DEP-1 preferentially to dephosphorylate particular tyrosine residues that are required for Met-induced signaling suggests that DEP-1 may function in controlling the specificity of signals induced by this PTK, rather than as a simple "off-switch" to counteract PTK activity.

12640114|a|beta-Catenin has a key role in the formation of adherens junction through its interactions with E-cadherin and alpha-catenin. We show here that interaction of beta-catenin with alpha-catenin is regulated by the phosphorylation of beta-catenin Tyr-142. This residue can be phosphorylated in vitro by Fer or Fyn tyrosine kinases. Transfection of these kinases to epithelial cells disrupted the association between both catenins. We have also examined whether these kinases are involved in the regulation of this interaction by K-ras. Stable transfectants of the K-ras oncogene in intestinal epithelial IEC18 cells were generated which show little alpha-catenin-beta-catenin association with respect to control clones; this effect is accompanied by increased Tyr-142 phosphorylation and activation of Fer and Fyn kinases. As reported for Fer, Fyn kinase is constitutively bound to p120 catenin; expression of K-ras induces the phosphorylation of p120 catenin on tyrosine residues increasing its affinity for E-cadherin and, consequently, promotes the association of Fyn with the adherens junction complex. Yes tyrosine kinase also binds to p120 catenin but only upon activation, and stimulates Fer and Fyn tyrosine kinases. These results indicate that p120 catenin acts as a docking protein facilitating the activation of Fer/Fyn tyrosine kinases by Yes and demonstrate the role of these p120 catenin-associated kinases in the regulation of beta-catenin-alpha-catenin interaction.

12842894|a|The activation of NF-kappaB has been shown to be regulated by multiple phosphorylations of IkappaBs and the NF-kappaB p65 subunit. Here, we characterized the intracellular signaling pathway leading to phosphorylation of p65 on Ser-536 using a novel anti-phospho-p65 (Ser-536) antibody. The Ser-536 of endogenous p65 was rapidly phosphorylated in response to a wide variety of NF-kappaB stimulants including TNF-alpha in the cytoplasm and rapidly dephosphorylated in the nucleus. The TNF-alpha-but not IL-1beta-induced Ser-536 phosphorylation was severely impaired in murine embryonic fibroblasts derived from traf2-/-traf5-/- mice. Bay 11-7082, an inhibitor of IkappaB phosphorylation, inhibited the TNF-alpha-induced phosphorylation in vivo. In addition, overexpression of TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1), IKKalpha and IKKbeta stimulated the phosphorylation, and their dominant negative mutants blocked the TNF-alpha-induced phosphorylation. Moreover, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) against TAK1, IKKalpha and IKKbeta blocked the phosphorylation of endogenous p65. On the other hand, calyculin-A, a protein phosphatase inhibitor, blocked the dephosphorylation in the nucleus in vivo. These results indicate that similar signaling pathways were utilized for the phosphorylations of IkappaBalpha and p65, which further support the idea that both IkappaB and NF-kappaB are substrates for the IKK complex in the activation of NF-kappaB.

12446583|a|We investigated the effect of overexpression of protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) on insulin signaling in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Overexpression of a wild-type PTP1B in L1 adipocytes as well as in L6 myocytes, led to a profound decrease in insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of MAPK. Even though the decrease in insulin receptor substrate protein-1 (IRS-1) phosphorylation was identical with that seen in L6 myocytes, overexpression of wild-type PTP1B in L1 adipocytes was associated with modest impairment of insulin-stimulated Akt phosphorylation in addition to a small, but significant, attenuation in insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, when compared with a phosphatase-negative mutant. Regarding the relatively small effect on Akt phosphorylation, we obtained identical results in rat 1 fibroblasts overexpressing human insulin receptor, suggesting that the higher expression levels of insulin receptor and IRS-1 might be responsible. With regard to the large effect on MAPK phosphorylation, we found that PTP1B overexpression led to the impaired phosphorylation of both IRS-1 and Shc, resulting in a decrease in their association with Grb2. Furthermore, phosphorylation of Shc stimulated by platelet-derived growth factor was also attenuated, without any change in its receptors, suggesting that PTP1B directly regulates Shc phosphorylation. These data demonstrate that PTP1B negatively regulates insulin signaling in the MAPK cascade to a much greater extent than the Akt pathway in some cell lines, especially in L1 adipocytes.

12857726|a|Human platelets express the receptor for immunoglobulin G, FcgammaRIIa, that triggers cell aggregation upon interaction with immune complexes. Here, we report that the rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of the Linker for Activation of T-cell (LAT) in human platelets stimulated by FcgammaRIIa cross-linking was followed by its complete dephosphorylation in an alphaIIb/beta3 integrin-dependent manner. Concomitant to LAT dephosphorylation, the protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) was activated through a mechanism involving its proteolysis by calpains downstream of integrins. Both PTP1B and LAT were associated with the actin cytoskeleton complex formed during platelet aggregation. Moreover, phospho-LAT appeared as a good substrate of activated PTP1B in vitro and these two proteins interacted upon platelet activation by FcgammaRIIa cross-linking. The permeant substrate-trapping PTP1B (TAT-PTP1B D181A) partly inhibited LAT dephosphorylation in human platelets, strongly suggesting that this tyrosine phosphatase was involved in this regulatory pathway. Using a pharmacological inhibitor, we provide evidence that PTP1B activation and LAT dephosphorylation processes were required for irreversible platelet aggregation. Altogether, our results demonstrate that PTP1B plays an important role in the integrin-mediated dephosphorylation of LAT in human platelets and is involved in the control of irreversible aggregation upon FcgammaRIIa stimulation.

12421363|a|Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) is an essential protein kinase that regulates numerous functions within the cell. One critically important substrate of GSK3beta is the microtubule-associated protein tau. Phosphorylation of tau by GSK3beta decreases tau-microtubule interactions. In addition to phosphorylating tau, GSK3beta is a downstream regulator of the wnt signaling pathway, which maintains the levels of beta-catenin. Axin plays a central role in regulating beta-catenin levels by bringing together GSK3beta and beta-catenin and facilitating the phosphorylation of beta-catenin, targeting it for ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. Although axin clearly facilitates the phosphorylation of beta-catenin, its effects on the phosphorylation of other GSK3beta substrates are unclear. Therefore in this study the effects of axin on GSK3beta-mediated tau phosphorylation were examined. The results clearly demonstrate that axin is a negative regulator of tau phosphorylation by GSK3beta. This negative regulation of GSK3beta-mediated tau phosphorylation is due to the fact that axin efficiently binds GSK3beta but not tau and thus sequesters GSK3beta away from tau, as an axin mutant that does not bind GSK3beta did not inhibit tau phosphorylation by GSK3beta. This is the first demonstration that axin negatively affects the phosphorylation of a GSK3beta substrate, and provides a novel mechanism by which tau phosphorylation and function can be regulated within the cell.

12471024|a|ClC chloride channels are widely distributed in organisms across the evolutionary spectrum, and members of the mammalian family play crucial roles in cellular function and are mutated in several human diseases (Jentsch, T. J., Stein, V., Weinreich, F., and Zdebik, A. A. (2002) Physiol. Rev. 82, 503-568). Within the ClC-3, -4, -5 branch of the family that are intracellular channels, two alternatively spliced ClC-3 isoforms were recognized recently (Ogura, T., Furukawa, T., Toyozaki, T., Yamada, K., Zheng, Y. J., Katayama, Y., Nakaya, H., and Inagaki, N. (2002) FASEB J. 16, 863-865). ClC-3A resides in late endosomes where it serves as an anion shunt during acidification. We show here that the ClC-3B PDZ-binding isoform resides in the Golgi where it co-localizes with a small amount of the other known PDZ-binding chloride channel, CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator). Both channel proteins bind the Golgi PDZ protein, GOPC (Golgi-associated PDZ and coiled-coil motif-containing protein). Interestingly, however, when overexpressed, GOPC, which is thought to influence traffic in the endocytic/secretory pathway, causes a large reduction in the amounts of both channels, probably by leading them to the degradative end of this pathway. ClC-3B as well as CFTR also binds EBP50 (ERM-binding phosphoprotein 50) and PDZK1, which are concentrated at the plasma membrane. However, only PDZK1 was found to promote interaction between the two channels, perhaps because they were able to bind to two different PDZ domains in PDZK1. Thus while small portions of the populations of ClC-3B and CFTR may associate and co-localize, the bulk of the two populations reside in different organelles of cells where they are expressed heterologously or endogenously, and therefore their cellular functions are likely to be distinct and not primarily related.

12730857|a|Rho proteins are involved in the regulation of several cellular functions. Data from in vitro studies suggest that RhoA could be involved in the inflammatory response. We investigated the role of RhoA and its downstream effector Rho kinase in intestinal inflammation.

12612082|a|The process of cellular morphogenesis is highly conserved in eukaryotes and is dependent upon the function of proteins that are centrally involved in specification of the cell cycle. The human enhancer of invasion clone 10 (HEI10) protein was identified from a HeLa cell library based on its ability to promote yeast agar invasion and filamentation. Through two-hybrid screening, the mitotic cyclin B1 and an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme were isolated as HEI10-interacting proteins. Mutation of the HEI10 divergent RING finger motif (characteristic of E3 ubiquitin ligases) and Cdc2/cyclin binding and phosphorylation sites alter HEI10-dependent yeast phenotypes, including delay in G(2)/M transition. In vertebrates, the addition of HEI10 inhibits nuclear envelope breakdown and mitotic entry in Xenopus egg extracts. Mechanistically, HEI10 expression reduces cyclin B levels in cycling Xenopus eggs and reduces levels of the cyclin B ortholog Clb2p in yeast. HEI10 is itself a specific in vitro substrate of purified cyclin B/cdc2, with a TPVR motif as primary phosphorylation site. Finally, HEI10 is itself ubiquitinated in egg extracts and is also autoubiquitinated in vitro. These and other points lead to a model in which HEI10 defines a divergent class of E3 ubiquitin ligase, functioning in progression through G(2)/M.

12493754|a|Chk2 is a protein kinase intermediary in DNA damage checkpoint pathways. DNA damage induces phosphorylation of Chk2 at multiple sites concomitant with activation. Chk2 phosphorylated at Thr-68 is found in nuclear foci at sites of DNA damage (1). We report here that Chk2 phosphorylated at Thr-68 and Thr-26 or Ser-28 is localized to centrosomes and midbodies in the absence of DNA damage. In a search for interactions between Chk2 and proteins with similar subcellular localization patterns, we found that Chk2 coimmunoprecipitates with Polo-like kinase 1, a regulator of chromosome segregation, mitotic entry, and mitotic exit. Plk1 overexpression enhances phosphorylation of Chk2 at Thr-68. Plk1 phosphorylates recombinant Chk2 in vitro. Indirect immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy revealed the co-localization of Chk2 and Plk1 to centrosomes in early mitosis and to the midbody in late mitosis. These findings suggest lateral communication between the DNA damage and mitotic checkpoints.

12540855|a|Acetylation, phosphorylation and methylation of the amino-terminal tails of histones are thought to be involved in the regulation of chromatin structure and function. With just one exception, the enzymes identified in the methylation of specific lysine residues on histones (histone methyltransferases) belong to the SET family. The high-resolution crystal structure of a ternary complex of human SET7/9 with a histone peptide and cofactor reveals that the peptide substrate and cofactor bind on opposite surfaces of the enzyme. The target lysine accesses the active site of the enzyme and the S-adenosyl-l-methionine (AdoMet) cofactor by inserting its side chain into a narrow channel that runs through the enzyme, connecting the two surfaces. Here we show from the structure and from solution studies that SET7/9, unlike most other SET proteins, is exclusively a mono-methylase. The structure indicates the molecular basis of the specificity of the enzyme for the histone target, and allows us to propose a model for the methylation reaction that accounts for the role of many of the residues that are invariant across the SET family.

12393858|a|Protein kinases and protein phosphatases exert coordinated control over many essential cellular processes. Here, we describe the cloning and characterization of a novel human transmembrane protein KPI-2 (Kinase/Phosphatase/Inhibitor-2) that was identified by yeast two-hybrid using protein phosphatase inhibitor-2 (Inh2) as bait. KPI-2 mRNA was predominantly expressed in skeletal muscle. KPI-2 is a 1503-residue protein with two predicted transmembrane helices at the N terminus, a kinase domain, followed by a C-terminal domain. The transmembrane helices were sufficient for targeting proteins to the membrane. KPI-2 kinase domain has about 60% identity with its closest relative, a tyrosine kinase. However, it only exhibited serine/threonine kinase activity in autophosphorylation reactions or with added substrates. KPI-2 kinase domain phosphorylated protein phosphatase-1 (PP1C) at Thr(320), which attenuated PP1C activity. KPI-2 C-terminal domain directly associated with PP1C, and this required a VTF motif. Inh2 associated with KPI-2 C-terminal domain with and without PP1C. Thus, KPI-2 is a kinase with sites to associate with PP1C and Inh2 to form a regulatory complex that is localized to membranes.

12805220|a|The LKB1 gene encodes a serine/threonine kinase mutated in Peutz-Jeghers cancer syndrome. Despite several proposed models for LKB1 function in development and in tumour suppression, the detailed molecular action of LKB1 remains undefined. Here, we report the identification and characterization of an LKB1-specific adaptor protein and substrate, STRAD (STe20 Related ADaptor). STRAD consists of a STE20- like kinase domain, but lacks several residues that are indispensable for intrinsic catalytic activity. Endogenous LKB1 and STRAD form a complex in which STRAD activates LKB1, resulting in phosphorylation of both partners. STRAD determines the subcellular localization of wild-type, but not mutant LKB1, translocating it from nucleus to cytoplasm. One LKB1 mutation previously identified in a Peutz-Jeghers family that does not compromise its kinase activity is shown here to interfere with LKB1 binding to STRAD, and hence with STRAD-dependent regulation. Removal of endogenous STRAD by siRNA abrogates the LKB1-induced G(1) arrest. Our results imply that STRAD plays a key role in regulating the tumour suppressor activities of LKB1.

23824069|a|All class I phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) associate tightly with regulatory subunits through interactions that have been thought to be constitutive. PI3Kγ is key to the regulation of immune cell responses activated by G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Remarkably we find that PKCβ phosphorylates Ser582 in the helical domain of the PI3Kγ catalytic subunit p110γ in response to clustering of the high-affinity IgE receptor (FcεRI) and/or store-operated Ca²⁺- influx in mast cells. Phosphorylation of p110γ correlates with the release of the p84 PI3Kγ adapter subunit from the p84-p110γ complex. Ser582 phospho-mimicking mutants show increased p110γ activity and a reduced binding to the p84 adapter subunit. As functional p84-p110γ is key to GPCR-mediated p110γ signaling, this suggests that PKCβ-mediated p110γ phosphorylation disconnects PI3Kγ from its canonical inputs from trimeric G proteins, and enables p110γ to operate downstream of Ca²⁺ and PKCβ. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry shows that the p84 adaptor subunit interacts with the p110γ helical domain, and reveals an unexpected mechanism of PI3Kγ regulation. Our data show that the interaction of p110γ with its adapter subunit is vulnerable to phosphorylation, and outline a novel level of PI3K control.

12860405|a|Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinases (IRAKs) are central components of Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) signaling pathways. In an attempt to discover novel signal transducers in TIR signaling, we identified human Pellino2 as an interaction partner of IRAK4. Pellino2 interacts with kinase-active as well as kinase-inactive IRAK1 and IRAK4. Furthermore, Pellino2 is one of the first substrates identified for IRAK1 and IRAK4. Functional studies using overexpression or RNAi knock-down of Pellino2 suggest a role of Pellino2 as a scaffolding protein similar to Pellino1. However, unlike Pellino1, Pellino2 does not seem to activate a specific transcription factor, but links TIR signaling to basic cellular processes.

12769847|a|Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) and neural (N)-WASP regulate dynamic actin structures through the ability of their VCA domains to bind to and stimulate the actin nucleating activity of the Arp2/3 complex. Here we identify two phosphorylation sites in the VCA domain of WASP at serines 483 and 484. S483 and S484 are substrates for casein kinase 2 in vitro and in vivo. Phosphorylation of these residues increases the affinity of the VCA domain for the Arp2/3 complex 7-fold and is required for efficient in vitro actin polymerization by the full-length WASP molecule. We propose that constitutive VCA domain phosphorylation is required for optimal stimulation of the Arp2/3 complex by WASP.

12721299|a|An increasing number of tyrosine kinases have been shown to associate with isoforms of the protein kinase C (PKC) family. Here, we show evidence for physical and functional interaction between PKCdelta and the Src family kinase Fyn in human platelets activated by alboaggregin-A, a snake venom capable of activating both GPIb-V-IX and GPVI adhesion receptors. This interaction involves phosphorylation of PKCdelta on tyrosine and is specific in that other isoforms of PKC, PKCepsilon and lambda, which also become tyrosine-phosphorylated, do not interact with Fyn. In addition, PKCdelta does not interact with other platelet-expressed tyrosine kinases Syk, Src, or Btk. Stimulation also leads to activation of both Fyn and PKCdelta and to serine phosphorylation of Fyn within a PKC consensus sequence. Alboaggregin-A-dependent activation of Fyn is blocked by bisindolylmaleimide I, suggesting a role for PKC isoforms in regulating Fyn activity. Platelet activation with alboaggregin-A induces translocation of the two kinases from cytoplasm to the plasma membrane of platelets, as observed by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. Translocation of Fyn and PKCdelta are blocked by PP1 and bisindolylmaleimide I, showing a dependence upon Src and PKC kinase activities. Although PKC activity is required for translocation, it is not required for association between the two kinases, because this was not blocked by bisindolylmaleimide I. Rottlerin, which inhibited PKCdelta activity, did not block translocation of either PKCdelta or Fyn but potentiated platelet aggregation, 5-hydroxytryptamine secretion, and the calcium response induced by alboaggregin-A, indicating that this kinase plays a negative role in the control of these processes.

23972473|a|The K650E gain-of-function mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of FGF receptor 3 (FGFR3) causes Thanatophoric Dysplasia type II, a neonatal lethal congenital dwarfism syndrome, and when acquired somatically, it contributes to carcinogenesis. In this report, we determine the crystal structure of the FGFR3 kinase domain harboring this pathogenic mutation and show that the mutation introduces a network of intramolecular hydrogen bonds to stabilize the active-state conformation. In the crystal, the mutant FGFR3 kinases are caught in the act of trans-phosphorylation on a kinase insert autophosphorylation site, emphasizing the fact that the K650E mutation circumvents the requirement for A-loop tyrosine phosphorylation in kinase activation. Analysis of this trans-phosphorylation complex sheds light onto the determinants of tyrosine trans-phosphorylation specificity. We propose that the targeted inhibition of this pathogenic FGFR3 kinase may be achievable by small molecule kinase inhibitors that selectively bind the active-state conformation of FGFR3 kinase.

28054552|a|It is well known that c-Src has important roles in tumorigenesis. However, it remains unclear whether c-Src contributes to metabolic reprogramming. Here we find that c-Src can interact with and phosphorylate hexokinases HK1 and HK2, the rate-limiting enzymes in glycolysis. Tyrosine phosphorylation dramatically increases their catalytic activity and thus enhances glycolysis. Mechanistically, c-Src phosphorylation of HK1 at Tyr732 robustly decreases its K

27314038|a|The LRRK2 mutation is a major causal mutation in familial Parkinson's disease. Although LRRK2 contains functional GTPase and kinase domains and their activities are altered by pathogenic mutations, most studies focused on LRRK2 kinase activity because the most prevalent mutant, G2019S, enhances kinase activity. However, the G2019S mutation is extremely rare in the Asian population. Instead, the G2385R mutation was reported as a major risk factor in the Asian population. Similar to other LRRK2 studies, G2385R studies have also focused on kinase activity. Here, we investigated GTPase activities of G2385R with other LRRK2 mutants, such as G2019S, R1441C, and I2020T, as well as wild type (WT). Our results suggest that both I2020T and G2385R contain GTPase activities stronger than that of WT. A kinase assay using the commercial recombinant proteins showed that I2020T harbored stronger activity, whereas G2385R had weaker activity than that of WT, as reported previously. This is the first report of LRRK2 I2020T and G2385R GTPase activities and shows that most of the LRRK2 mutations that are pathogenic or a risk factor altered either kinase or GTPase activity, suggesting that their physiological consequences are caused by altered enzyme activities. 

27357661|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a large, multidomain protein containing two catalytic domains: a Ras of complex proteins (Roc) G-domain and a kinase domain. Mutations associated with familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD) have been identified in both catalytic domains, as well as in several of its multiple putative regulatory domains. Several of these mutations have been linked to increased kinase activity. Despite the role of LRRK2 in the pathogenesis of PD, little is known about its overall architecture and how PD-linked mutations alter its function and enzymatic activities. Here, we have modeled the 3D structure of dimeric, full-length LRRK2 by combining domain-based homology models with multiple experimental constraints provided by chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry, negative-stain EM, and small-angle X-ray scattering. Our model reveals dimeric LRRK2 has a compact overall architecture with a tight, multidomain organization. Close contacts between the N-terminal ankyrin and C-terminal WD40 domains, and their proximity-together with the LRR domain-to the kinase domain suggest an intramolecular mechanism for LRRK2 kinase activity regulation. Overall, our studies provide, to our knowledge, the first structural framework for understanding the role of the different domains of full-length LRRK2 in the pathogenesis of PD.

27478041|a|The adipocyte-rich microenvironment forms a niche for ovarian cancer metastasis, but the mechanisms driving this process are incompletely understood. Here we show that salt-inducible kinase 2 (SIK2) is overexpressed in adipocyte-rich metastatic deposits compared with ovarian primary lesions. Overexpression of SIK2 in ovarian cancer cells promotes abdominal metastasis while SIK2 depletion prevents metastasis in vivo. Importantly, adipocytes induce calcium-dependent activation and autophosphorylation of SIK2. Activated SIK2 plays a dual role in augmenting AMPK-induced phosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and in activating the PI3K/AKT pathway through p85α-S154 phosphorylation. These findings identify SIK2 at the apex of the adipocyte-induced signaling cascades in cancer cells and make a compelling case for targeting SIK2 for therapy in ovarian cancer.

24013921|a|Phosphorylation is a pivotal regulatory mechanism for protein stability and activity in circadian clocks regardless of their evolutionary origin. It determines the speed and strength of molecular oscillations by acting on transcriptional activators and their repressors, which form negative feedback loops. In Drosophila, the CK2 kinase phosphorylates and destabilizes the PERIOD (PER) and TIMELESS (TIM) proteins, which inhibit CLOCK (CLK) transcriptional activity. Here we show that CK2 also targets the CLK activator directly. Downregulating the activity of the catalytic α subunit of CK2 induces CLK degradation, even in the absence of PER and TIM. Unexpectedly, the regulatory β subunit of the CK2 holoenzyme is not required for the regulation of CLK stability. In addition, downregulation of CK2α activity decreases CLK phosphorylation and increases per and tim transcription. These results indicate that CK2 inhibits CLK degradation while reducing its activity. Since the CK1 kinase promotes CLK degradation, we suggest that CLK stability and transcriptional activity result from counteracting effects of CK1 and CK2.

27373337|a|N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) is a prevalent, reversible chemical modification of functional RNAs and is important for central events in biology. The core m(6)A writers are Mettl3 and Mettl14, which both contain methyltransferase domains. How Mettl3 and Mettl14 cooperate to catalyze methylation of adenosines has remained elusive. We present crystal structures of the complex of Mettl3/Mettl14 methyltransferase domains in apo form as well as with bound S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) or S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) in the catalytic site. We determine that the heterodimeric complex of methyltransferase domains, combined with CCCH motifs, constitutes the minimally required regions for creating m(6)A modifications in vitro. We also show that Mettl3 is the catalytically active subunit, while Mettl14 plays a structural role critical for substrate recognition. Our model provides a molecular explanation for why certain mutations of Mettl3 and Mettl14 lead to impaired function of the methyltransferase complex.

27505672|a|Hypoxia is a universal driver of aggressive tumor behavior, but the underlying mechanisms are not completely understood. Using a phosphoproteomics screen, we now show that active Akt accumulates in the mitochondria during hypoxia and phosphorylates pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1) on Thr346 to inactivate the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. In turn, this pathway switches tumor metabolism toward glycolysis, antagonizes apoptosis and autophagy, dampens oxidative stress, and maintains tumor cell proliferation in the face of severe hypoxia. Mitochondrial Akt-PDK1 signaling correlates with unfavorable prognostic markers and shorter survival in glioma patients and may provide an "actionable" therapeutic target in cancer.

23776406|a|Activation of the IκB kinase (IKK) is central to NF-κB signaling. However, the precise activation mechanism by which catalytic IKK subunits gain the ability to induce NF-κB transcriptional activity is not well understood. Here we report a 4 Å x-ray crystal structure of human IKK2 (hIKK2) in its catalytically active conformation. The hIKK2 domain architecture closely resembles that of Xenopus IKK2 (xIKK2). However, whereas inactivated xIKK2 displays a closed dimeric structure, hIKK2 dimers adopt open conformations that permit higher order oligomerization within the crystal. Reversible oligomerization of hIKK2 dimers is observed in solution. Mutagenesis confirms that two of the surfaces that mediate oligomerization within the crystal are also critical for the process of hIKK2 activation in cells. We propose that IKK2 dimers transiently associate with one another through these interaction surfaces to promote trans auto-phosphorylation as part of their mechanism of activation. This structure-based model supports recently published structural data that implicate strand exchange as part of a mechanism for IKK2 activation via trans auto-phosphorylation. Moreover, oligomerization through the interfaces identified in this study and subsequent trans auto-phosphorylation account for the rapid amplification of IKK2 phosphorylation observed even in the absence of any upstream kinase.

27332895|a|Aurora-C, a member of the Aurora kinase family that can complement Aurora-B function in mitosis is either moderately expressed or repressed in most adult somatic tissues but is active in early embryonic development and expressed at elevated levels in multiple human cancers. Aurora-C overexpression reportedly plays a role in tumorigenic transformation. We performed detailed characterization of Aurora-C interactions with members of the Chromosome Passenger Complex (CPC), Survivin and Inner Centromere Protein (INCENP) in reference to known Aurora-B interactions to understand the functional significance of Aurora-C overexpression in human cancer cells. The results revealed that silencing of Aurora-C or -B individually does not affect localization of the other kinase and the two kinases exist predominantly in independent complexes in vivo. Presence of Aurora-C and -B in molecular complexes of varying as well as overlapping sizes and co-existence in INCENP overexpressing cells indicated oligomerization of ternary complexes under different physiological conditions in vivo. Furthermore, Aurora-C and -B stabilized INCENP through interaction with and phosphorylation of the IN box domain while Aurora-C was activated following Survivin phosphorylation on Serine 20. Phosphorylation of Survivin residue Serine 20 by Aurora-C and -B appears important for proper chromosome segregation. Taken together, our study suggests that Aurora-C, expressed at low levels in somatic cells, functions as a catalytic component of the CPC together with Aurora-B through mitosis. Elevated expression of Aurora-C in cancer cells alters the structural and functional characteristics of the Aurora-B-CPC leading to chromosomal instability. 

18067272|a|Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) triggers a signaling pathway converging on the activation of NF-kappaB, which forms the basis for many physiological and pathological processes. In a kinase gene screen using a NF-kappaB reporter, we observed that overexpression of casein kinase 1alpha (CK1alpha) enhanced TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB activation, and a CK1alpha kinase dead mutant, CK1alpha (K46A), reduced NF-kappaB activation induced by TNFalpha. We subsequently demonstrated that CK1alpha interacted with receptor interacting protein 1 (RIP1) but not with TRADD, TRAF2, MEKK3, IKKalpha, IKKbeta, or IKKgamma in mammalian cells. RIP1 is an indispensable molecule in TNFalpha/NF-kappaB signaling. We demonstrated that CK1alpha interacted with and phosphorylated RIP1 at the intermediate domain. Finally, we showed that CK1alpha enhanced RIP1-mediated NF-kappaB activation. Taken together, our studies suggest that CK1alpha is another kinase that regulates RIP1 function in NF-kappaB activation.

23955022|a|OTUB1 is a Lys48-specific deubiquitinating enzyme that forms a complex in vivo with E2 ubiquitin (Ub)-conjugating enzymes including UBC13 and UBCH5. OTUB1 binds E2~Ub thioester intermediates and prevents ubiquitin transfer, thereby noncatalytically inhibiting accumulation of polyubiquitin. We report here that a second role of OTUB1-E2 interactions is to stimulate OTUB1 cleavage of Lys48 polyubiquitin. This stimulation is regulated by the ratio of charged to uncharged E2 and by the concentration of Lys48-linked polyubiquitin and free ubiquitin. Structural and biochemical studies of human and worm OTUB1 and UBCH5B show that the E2 enzyme stimulates binding of the Lys48 polyubiquitin substrate by stabilizing folding of the OTUB1 N-terminal ubiquitin-binding helix. Our results suggest that OTUB1-E2 complexes in the cell are poised to regulate polyubiquitin chain elongation or degradation in response to changing levels of E2 charging and available free ubiquitin. 

18201571|a|MgcRacGAP, a Rho GAP essential to cytokinesis, works both as a Rho GTPase regulator and as a scaffolding protein. MgcRacGAP interacts with MKLP1 to form the centralspindlin complex and associates with the RhoGEF Ect2. The GAP activity of MgcRacGAP is regulated by Aurora B phosphorylation. We have isolated B56epsilon, a PP2A regulatory subunit, as a new MgcRacGAP partner. We report here that (i) MgcRacGAP is phosphorylated by Aurora B and Cdk1, (ii) PP2A dephosphorylates Aurora B and Cdk1 phosphorylated sites and (iii) inhibition of PP2A abrogates MgcRacGAP/Ect2 interaction. Therefore, PP2A may regulate cytokinesis by dephosphorylating MgcRacGAP and its interacting partners.

18097573|a|Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) play a pleomorphic role in signal transduction, similarly to an oncogene. Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) inhibit STAT pathways. In breast cancer, little is known about the correlation among STATs, SOCS, and clinicopathological/biological features. Therefore, we investigated p-STAT3 (activated form of STAT3) and SOCS-1/3 expression, and clarified their correlation. Immunohistochemical staining for p-STAT3 antigen was performed in 74 surgically resected primary breast cancers. Real-time RT-PCR was used to measure mRNA expression of SOCS-1 and SOCS-3. There were no significant correlations between p-STAT3 expression and clinicopathological/biological features. SOCS-3 mRNA expression in the lymph node-positive group was significantly lower than that in the negative group (p=0.013). Among three groups divided based on the number of involved lymph nodes (node-negative group, 1-3 involved nodes group, 4 or more involved nodes group), the group with 4 or more involved nodes had the lowest expression of SOCS-3 (p=0.043). Correlations were not seen between SOCS-1 and SOCS-3 expression and other clinicopathological/biological features, except for blood vessel invasion. There were no statistical correlations between either SOCS-1 or SOCS-3 mRNA expression and p-STAT3 expression. Reduced expression of SOCS-3 is closely related to lymph node metastasis. Therefore, SOCS-3 may be a good predictor for lymph node metastasis.

18007657|a|In plants, histone H3 lysine methyltransferases are important in gene silencing and developmental regulation; however, the roles of histone H4 methylation in plant development remain unclear. Recent studies found a type II histone arginine methyltransferase, AtPRTM5, which is involved in promoting growth and flowering. Here, we purified a dimerized plant-specific histone H4 methyltransferase, plant histone arginine methyltransferase 10 (PHRMT10), from cauliflower. Arabidopsis thaliana protein arginine methyltransferase 10 (AtPRMT10)--the Arabidopsis homologue of PHRMT10--was shown to be a type I PRMT, which preferentially asymmetrically methylated histone H4R3 in vitro. Genetic disruption of AtPRMT10 resulted in late flowering by upregulating FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) transcript levels. In addition, we show that AtPRMT10 functions genetically separate from AtPRMT5, but that each acts to fine-tune expression of FLC. This work adds an extra layer of complexity to flowering-time regulation and also sheds light on the importance of asymmetric arginine methylation in plant development.

17974954|a|Src-specific activity has been reported to be elevated in a high percentage of colon cancer cell lines and tumors, but the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. In this study, we report that, in the seven cancer cell lines tested, Src-specific activity was elevated (5.2- to 18.7-fold) relative to normal colon cells (FHC). This activation of Src correlated with reduced phosphorylation at Y530 of Src, whereas there was no significant change in the level of phosphorylation at Y419. The membrane tyrosine phosphatase activity for a Src family-specific phosphopeptide substrate FCP (Fyn COOH-terminal peptide phosphorylated by Csk) was greatly increased in the cancer cells and was attributed to PTP1B in most of the cell lines. Membrane PTP1B protein levels were also greatly increased. Overexpression of PTP1B increased Src specific activity in colon cancer cells by reducing phosphorylation at Y530 of Src. It also increased anchorage-independent cell growth and this increase was blocked by the Src inhibitor PP2 and Src small interfering RNA (siRNA). Down-regulating PTP1B activity by PTP1B inhibitor CinnGEL 2Me or knocking down PTP1B using siRNA also reduced Src kinase activity and colony formation ability of colon cancer cells. PTP1B siRNA reduced tumor growth in nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice. This study suggests that (a) PTP1B can act as an important activator of Src in colon cancer cells via dephosphorylation at Y530 of Src and (b) elevated levels of PTP1B can increase tumorigenicity of colon cancer cells by activating Src.

18162466|a|The life cycle of protein kinase C (PKC) is controlled by multiple phosphorylation and dephosphorylation steps. The maturation of PKC requires three ordered phosphorylations, one at the activation loop and two at COOH-terminal sites, the turn motif and the hydrophobic motif, to yield a stable and signaling-competent enzyme. Dephosphorylation of the enzyme leads to protein degradation. We have recently discovered a novel family of protein phosphatases named PH domain leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP) whose members terminate Akt signaling by dephosphorylating the hydrophobic motif on Akt. Here we show that the two PHLPP isoforms, PHLPP1 and PHLPP2, also dephosphorylate the hydrophobic motif on PKC betaII, an event that shunts PKC to the detergent-insoluble fraction, effectively terminating its life cycle. Deletion mutagenesis reveals that the PH domain is necessary for the effective dephosphorylation of PKC betaII by PHLPP in cells, whereas the PDZ-binding motif, required for Akt regulation, is dispensable. The phorbol ester-mediated dephosphorylation of the hydrophobic site, but not the turn motif or activation loop, is insensitive to okadaic acid, consistent with PHLPP, a PP2C family member, controlling the hydrophobic site. In addition, knockdown of PHLPP expression reduces the rate of phorbol ester-triggered dephosphorylation of the hydrophobic motif, but not turn motif, of PKC alpha. Last, we show that depletion of PHLPP in colon cancer and normal breast epithelial cells results in an increase in conventional and novel PKC levels. These data reveal that PHLPP controls the cellular levels of PKC by specifically dephosphorylating the hydrophobic motif, thus destabilizing the enzyme and promoting its degradation.

23972470|a|The tumor-suppressive Hippo pathway controls tissue homeostasis through balancing cell proliferation and apoptosis. Activation of the kinases Mst1 and Mst2 (Mst1/2) is a key upstream event in this pathway and remains poorly understood. Mst1/2 and their critical regulators RASSFs contain Salvador/RASSF1A/Hippo (SARAH) domains that can homo- and heterodimerize. Here, we report the crystal structures of human Mst2 alone and bound to RASSF5. Mst2 undergoes activation through transautophosphorylation at its activation loop, which requires SARAH-mediated homodimerization. RASSF5 disrupts Mst2 homodimer and blocks Mst2 autoactivation. Binding of RASSF5 to already activated Mst2, however, does not inhibit its kinase activity. Thus, RASSF5 can act as an inhibitor or a potential positive regulator of Mst2, depending on whether it binds to Mst2 before or after activation-loop phosphorylation. We propose that these temporally sensitive functions of RASSFs enable the Hippo pathway to respond to and integrate diverse cellular signals.

18256265|a|Drosophila visual signaling, a G-protein-coupled phospholipase Cbeta (PLCbeta)-mediated mechanism, is regulated by eye-protein kinase C (PKC) that promotes light adaptation and fast deactivation, most likely via phosphorylation of inactivation no afterpotential D (INAD) and TRP (transient receptor potential). To reveal the critical phosphatases that dephosphorylate INAD, we used several biochemical analyses and identified protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) as a candidate. Importantly, the catalytic subunit of PP2A, microtubule star (MTS), is copurified with INAD, and an elevated phosphorylation of INAD by eye-PKC was observed in three mts heterozygotes. To explore whether PP2A (MTS) regulates dephosphorylation of INAD by counteracting eye-PKC [INAC (inactivation no afterpotential C] in vivo, we performed ERG recordings. We discovered that inaC(P209) was semidominant, because inaC(P209) heterozygotes displayed abnormal light adaptation and slow deactivation. Interestingly, the deactivation defect of inaC(P209) heterozygotes was rescued by the mts(XE2258) heterozygous background. In contrast, mts(XE2258) failed to modify the severe deactivation of norpA(P16), indicating that MTS does not modulate NORPA (no receptor potential A) (PLCbeta). Together, our results strongly indicate that dephosphorylation of INAD is catalyzed by PP2A, and a reduction of PP2A can compensate for a partial loss of function in eye-PKC, restoring the fast deactivation kinetics in vivo. We thus propose that the fast deactivation of the visual response is modulated in part by the phosphorylation of INAD.

18278056|a|Insulin receptor substrates 1 and 2 (IRS1 and -2) are crucial adaptor proteins in mediating the metabolic and mitogenic effects of insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1. These proteins consist of a pleckstrin homology domain, a phosphotyrosine binding domain and a C-terminal region containing numerous sites of tyrosine, serine and threonine phosphorylation. Previous yeast two-hybrid studies identified a region unique to IRS2, termed the kinase regulatory-loop binding (KRLB) region, which interacts with the tyrosine kinase domain of the insulin receptor. Here we present the crystal structure of the insulin receptor kinase in complex with a 15-residue peptide from the KRLB region. In the structure, this segment of IRS2 is bound in the kinase active site with Tyr628 positioned for phosphorylation. Although Tyr628 was phosphorylated by the insulin receptor, its catalytic turnover was poor, resulting in kinase inhibition. Our studies indicate that the KRLB region functions to limit tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2.

18084305|a|Salmonella SpvC belongs to a new enzyme family designated phosphothreonine lyases that irreversibly inactivate mitogen-activated protein kinases. The crystal structure of SpvC reported here reveals that the two phosphorylated residues in the substrate peptide predominantly mediate its recognition by SpvC. Substrate-induced conformational changes in SpvC sequester the phosphothreonine in a completely solvent-free environment, preventing the hydrolysis of the phosphate group and facilitating the elimination reaction.

18313049|a|RNF43 is a recently discovered RING finger protein that is implicated in colon cancer pathogenesis. This protein possesses growth-promoting activity but its mechanism remains unknown. In this study, to gain insight into the biological action of RNF43 we characterized it biochemically and intracellularly. A combination of indirect immunofluorescence analysis and biochemical fractionation experiments suggests that RNF43 resides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as well as in the nuclear envelope. Sucrose density gradient fractionation demonstrates that RNF43 co-exists with emerin, a representative inner nuclear membrane protein in the nuclear subcompartment. The cell-free system with pure components reveals that recombinant RNF43 fused with maltose-binding protein has autoubiquitylation activity. By the yeast two-hybrid screening we identified HAP95, a chromatin-associated protein interfacing the nuclear envelope, as an RNF43-interacting protein and substantiated this interaction in intact cells by the co-immunoprecipitation experiments. HAP95 is ubiquitylated and subjected to a proteasome-dependent degradation pathway, however, the experiments in which 293 cells expressing both RNF43 and HAP95 were treated with a proteasome inhibitor, MG132, show that HAP95 is unlikely to serve as a substrate of RNF43 ubiquitin ligase. These results infer that RNF43 is a resident protein of the ER and, at least partially, the nuclear membrane, with ubiquitin ligase activity and may be involved in cell growth control potentially through the interaction with HAP95.

18243099|a|Maintenance of chromosomal stability relies on coordination between various processes that are critical for proper chromosome segregation in mitosis. Here we show that monopolar spindle 1 (Mps1) kinase, which is essential for the mitotic checkpoint, also controls correction of improper chromosome attachments. We report that Borealin/DasraB, a member of the complex that regulates the Aurora B kinase, is directly phosphorylated by Mps1 on residues that are crucial for Aurora B activity and chromosome alignment. As a result, cells lacking Mps1 kinase activity fail to efficiently align chromosomes due to impaired Aurora B function at centromeres, leaving improper attachments uncorrected. Strikingly, Borealin/DasraB bearing phosphomimetic mutations restores Aurora B activity and alignment in Mps1-depleted cells. Mps1 thus coordinates attachment error correction and checkpoint signaling, two crucial responses to unproductive chromosome attachments.

25605758|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been identified as a causative gene for Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 contains a kinase and a GTPase domain, both of which provide critical intracellular signal-transduction functions. We showed previously that Rab5b, a small GTPase protein that regulates the motility and fusion of early endosomes, interacts with LRRK2 and co-regulates synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Using recombinant proteins, we show here that LRRK2 phosphorylates Rab5b at its Thr6 residue in in vitro kinase assays with mass spectrophotometry analysis. Phosphorylation of Rab5b by LRRK2 on the threonine residue was confirmed by western analysis using cells stably expressing LRRK2 G2019S. The phosphomimetic T6D mutant exhibited stronger GTPase activity than that of the wild-type Rab5b. In addition, phosphorylation of Rab5b by LRRK2 also exhibited GTPase activity stronger than that of the unphosphorylated Rab5b protein. Two assays testing Rab5's activity, neurite outgrowth analysis and epidermal growth factor receptor degradation assays, showed that Rab5b T6D exhibited phenotypes that were expected to be observed in the inactive Rab5b, including longer neurite length and less degradation of EGFR. These results suggest that LRRK2 kinase activity functions as a Rab5b GTPase activating protein and thus, negatively regulates Rab5b signalling. 

18045539|a|BMP receptors determine the intensity of BMP signals via Smad1 C-terminal phosphorylations. Here we show that a finely controlled cell biological pathway terminates this activity. The duration of the activated pSmad1(Cter) signal was regulated by sequential Smad1 linker region phosphorylations at conserved MAPK and GSK3 sites required for its polyubiquitinylation and transport to the centrosome. Proteasomal degradation of activated Smad1 and total polyubiquitinated proteins took place in the centrosome. Inhibitors of the Erk, p38, and JNK MAPKs, as well as GSK3 inhibitors, prolonged the duration of a pulse of BMP7. Wnt signaling decreased pSmad1(GSK3) antigen levels and redistributed it from the centrosome to cytoplasmic LRP6 signalosomes. In Xenopus embryos, it was found that Wnts induce epidermis and that this required an active BMP-Smad pathway. Epistatic experiments suggested that the dorsoventral (BMP) and anteroposterior (Wnt/GSK3) patterning gradients are integrated at the level of Smad1 phosphorylations during embryonic pattern formation.

14739927|a|ATR/Rad3-like kinases promote the DNA damage checkpoint through regulating Chk1 that restrains the activation of cyclin-dependent kinases. In fission yeast, Crb2, a BRCT-domain protein that is similar to vertebrate 53BP1, plays a crucial role in establishing this checkpoint. We report here that Crb2 regulates DNA damage checkpoint through temporal and dynamic interactions with Rad3, Chk1 and replication factor Cut5. The active complex formation between Chk1 and Crb2 is regulated by Rad3 and became maximal during the checkpoint arrest. Chk1 activation seems to need two steps of interaction changes: the loss of Rad3-Chk1 and Rad3-Crb2 interactions, and the association between hyperphosphorylated forms of Chk1 and Crb2. Chk1 is the major checkpoint kinase for the arrest of DNA polymerase mutants. The in vitro assay of Chk1 showed that its activation requires the presence of Crb2 BRCT. Hyperphosphorylation of Crb2 is also dependent on its intact BRCT. Finally, we show direct interaction between Rad3 and Crb2, which is inhibitory to Rad3 activity. Hence, Crb2 is the first to interact with both Rad3 and Chk1 kinases.

14527337|a|Erythropoietin (EPO) is the principal hormone regulating the proliferation of erythroid precursors and their differentiation into erythrocytes. Binding of ligand to the cell-surface EPO-R (EPO receptor) induces dimerization and JAK2 (Janus kinase 2)-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor. Less than 1% of the EPO-Rs are displayed on the cell surface; most of the receptor molecules are retained in intracellular compartments, including the ER (endoplasmic reticulum). Using pervanadate (PV) as a potent tool to inhibit cellular PTPs (protein tyrosine phosphatases), we demonstrated previously the accumulation of mature (endoglycosidase H-resistant) tyrosine-phosphorylated EPO-R [Cohen, Altaratz, Zick, Klingmuller and Neumann (1997) Biochem. J. 327, 391-397]. In the present study, we investigated the participation of the ER-associated PTP1B in the dephosphorylation of intracellular EPO-R. We demonstrate tyrosine phosphorylation of EPO-R in BOSC-23T cells co-expressing EPO-R and the 'substrate-trapping' mutant form of PTP1B, PTP1B D181A (referred to as PTP1BD). In vivo interaction between EPO-R and PTP1B suggested that PTP1B dephosphorylates the EPO-R intracellularly. Endoglycosidase H resistance of tyrosine-phosphorylated EPO-R in cells expressing PTP1BD suggested that mature EPO-R is dephosphorylated by PTP1B. Stimulation with EPO of cells co-expressing EPO-R and either PTP1BD or PTP1B resulted in an increase or decrease respectively in phosphotyrosine EPO-R. We thus suggest that PTP1B dephosphorylates EPO-stimulated EPO-R and participates in the down-regulation cascade of EPO-mediated signal transduction.

14704270|a|Synaptojanin 1 is a polyphosphoinositide phosphatase concentrated in presynaptic nerve terminals, where it dephosphorylates a pool of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate implicated in synaptic vesicle recycling. Like other proteins with a role in endocytosis, synaptojanin 1 undergoes constitutive phosphorylation in resting synapses and stimulation-dependent dephosphorylation by calcineurin. Here, we show that cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) phosphorylates synaptojanin 1 and regulates its function both in vitro and in intact synaptosomes. Cdk5 phosphorylation inhibited the inositol 5-phosphatase activity of synaptojanin 1, whereas dephosphorylation by calcineurin stimulated such activity. The activity of synaptojanin 1 was also stimulated by its interaction with endophilin 1, its major binding partner at the synapse. Notably, Cdk5 phosphorylated serine 1144, which is adjacent to the endophilin binding site. Mutation of serine 1144 to aspartic acid to mimic phosphorylation by Cdk5 inhibited the interaction of synaptojanin 1 with endophilin 1. These results suggest that Cdk5 and calcineurin may have an antagonistic role in the regulation of synaptojanin 1 recruitment and activity, and therefore in the regulation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate turnover at synapses.

14684745|a|Endophilin A1 is an SH3 domain-containing protein functioning in membrane trafficking on the endocytic pathway. We have identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase itch/AIP4 as an endophilin A1-binding partner. Itch belongs to the Nedd4/Rsp5p family of proteins and contains an N-terminal C2 domain, four WW domains and a catalytic HECT domain. Unlike other Nedd4/Rsp5p family members, itch possesses a short proline-rich domain that mediates its binding to the SH3 domain of endophilin A1. Itch ubiquitinates endophilin A1 and the SH3/proline-rich domain interaction facilitates this activity. Interestingly, itch co-localizes with markers of the endosomal system in a C2 domain-dependent manner and upon EGF stimulation, endophilin A1 translocates to an EGF-positive endosomal compartment where it colocalizes with itch. Moreover, EGF treatment of cells stimulates endophilin A1 ubiquitination. We have thus identified endophilin A1 as a substrate for the endosome-localized ubiquitin ligase itch. This interaction may be involved in ubiquitin-mediated sorting mechanisms operating at the level of endosomes.

14603323|a|The Cdc25A phosphatase is essential for cell-cycle progression because of its function in dephosphorylating cyclin-dependent kinases. In response to DNA damage or stalled replication, the ATM and ATR protein kinases activate the checkpoint kinases Chk1 and Chk2, which leads to hyperphosphorylation of Cdc25A. These events stimulate the ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis of Cdc25A and contribute to delaying cell-cycle progression, thereby preventing genomic instability. Here we report that beta-TrCP is the F-box protein that targets phosphorylated Cdc25A for degradation by the Skp1/Cul1/F-box protein complex. Downregulation of beta-TrCP1 and beta-TrCP2 expression by short interfering RNAs causes an accumulation of Cdc25A in cells progressing through S phase and prevents the degradation of Cdc25A induced by ionizing radiation, indicating that beta-TrCP may function in the intra-S-phase checkpoint. Consistent with this hypothesis, suppression of beta-TrCP expression results in radioresistant DNA synthesis in response to DNA damage--a phenotype indicative of a defect in the intra-S-phase checkpoint that is associated with an inability to regulate Cdc25A properly. Our results show that beta-TrCP has a crucial role in mediating the response to DNA damage through Cdc25A degradation.

12881425|a|The activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB is central to the control of the cellular response triggered by many stimuli. Once released from the inhibitory molecule IkappaB, NF-kappaB is translocated to the nucleus, and it has to be phosphorylated to activate transcription. In zeta protein kinase C (PKC)-deficient cells, NF-kappaB is transcriptionally inactive and the phosphorylation of the RelA subunit in response to tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha) is severely impaired. In vitro assays showed that zetaPKC directly phosphorylates RelA. Here we demonstrate that Ser311 accounts for zetaPKC phosphorylation of RelA and that this site is phosphorylated in vivo in response to TNF-alpha. Also, an inactivating mutation of that residue severely impairs RelA transcriptional activity, blocks its anti-apoptotic function and abrogates the interaction of RelA with the co-activator CBP as well as its recruitment, and that of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) with the interleukin-6 (IL-6) promoter. The interaction of endogenous CBP with endogenous RelA is inhibited in zetaPKC-/- cells, as well as the binding of Pol II to the IL-6 promoter. These results demonstrate the mechanism whereby zetaPKC regulates NF-kappaB activation in vivo.

14707117|a|Involvement of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp) in promoting cell activation requires its release from autoinhibitory structural constraints and has been attributed to WASp association with activated cdc42. Here, however, we show that T cell development and T cell receptor (TCR)-induced proliferation and actin polymerization proceed normally in WASp-/- mice expressing a WASp transgene lacking the cdc42 binding domain. By contrast, mutation of tyrosine residue Y291, identified here as the major site of TCR-induced WASp tyrosine phosphorylation, abrogated induction of WASp tyrosine phosphorylation and its effector activities, including nuclear factor of activated T cell transcriptional activity, actin polymerization, and immunological synapse formation. TCR-induced WASp tyrosine phosphorylation was also disrupted in T cells lacking Fyn, a kinase shown here to bind, colocalize with, and phosphorylate WASp. By contrast, WASp was tyrosine dephosphorylated by protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP)-PEST, a tyrosine phosphatase shown here to interact with WASp via proline, serine, threonine phosphatase interacting protein (PSTPIP)1 binding. Although Fyn enhanced WASp-mediated Arp2/3 activation and was required for synapse formation, PTP-PEST combined with PSTPIP1 inhibited WASp-driven actin polymerization and synapse formation. These observations identify key roles for Fyn and PTP-PEST in regulating WASp and imply that inducible WASp tyrosine phosphorylation can occur independently of cdc42 binding, but unlike the cdc42 interaction, is absolutely required for WASp contributions to T cell activation.

14707132|a|In examining the protein kinase components of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase (MAPK) cascades that regulate the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in Drosophila S2 cells, we previously found that distinct upstream kinases were involved in responses to sorbitol and lipopolysaccharide. Here we have extended that analysis to the possible MAPK kinase kinase kinases (MAP4Ks) in the JNK pathway. Fray, a putative Drosophila MAP4K, provided a major contribution to JNK activation by sorbitol. To explore the possible link to JNK in mammalian cells, we isolated and characterized OSR1 (oxidative stress-responsive 1), one of two human Fray homologs. OSR1 is a 58-kDa protein of 527 amino acids that is widely expressed in mammalian tissues and cell lines. Of potential regulators surveyed, endogenous OSR1 is activated only by osmotic stresses, notably sorbitol and to a lesser extent NaCl. However, OSR1 did not increase the activity of coexpressed JNK, nor did it activate three other MAPKs, p38, ERK2, and ERK5. A two-hybrid screen implicated another Ste20p family member, the p21-activated protein kinase PAK1, as an OSR1 target. OSR1 phosphorylated threonine 84 in the N-terminal regulatory domain of PAK1. Replacement of threonine 84 with glutamate reduced the activation of PAK1 by an active form of the small G protein Cdc42, suggesting that phosphorylation by OSR1 modulates the G protein sensitivity of PAK isoforms.

12878161|a|We previously identified BTBD1 and BTBD2 as novel topoisomerase I-interacting proteins that share 80% amino acid identity. Here we report the characterization of their subcellular localization. In a number of mouse and human cells, BTBD1 and BTBD2 (BTBD1/2) colocalized to punctate or elongated cytoplasmic bodies (< 5 microm long and several per cell) that were larger and more elongated in cancer cell lines than in fibroblasts and myoblasts. A search for potential colocalizing proteins identified TRIM family members that localize to morphologically similar cytoplasmic bodies, which were then tested for colocalization with BTBD1/2. TRIM5delta, expressed as a GFP fusion, colocalized with BTBD1/2 immunostaining and appeared to serve as a scaffold for the assembly of endogenous BTBD1/2 proteins. TRIM family members contain a RING domain, B-box(es), and coiled-coil regions, which have a characteristic order and spacing (RBCC domain). RING-dependent ubiquitin ligase activity and multimerization via the coiled-coil region may be defining properties of the RBCC/TRIM protein family. We found that TRIM5delta with a deleted coiled-coil region or a mutated RING domain failed to colocalize with BTBD1/2. Additionally, TRIM5delta ubiquitylated itself in a RING finger- and UbcH5B-dependent manner. BTBD1/2 each contain a PHR-similarity region, repeated twice on the putative ubiquitin ligases PAM, highwire and RPM-1, which also contain a RING and B-box. Thus, four protein modules found on each of these putative ubiquitin ligases, a RING, a B-box and two PHR repeats, are present on BTBD1/2 and TRIM5delta that are colocalized to cytoplasmic bodies.

14500717|a|Minibrain-related kinase (Mirk)/Dyrk1B is an arginine-directed serine/threonine kinase that is active in skeletal muscle development but is also expressed in various carcinomas. In the current study, the Met adaptor protein Ran-binding protein M (RanBPM) was identified as a Mirk-binding protein by yeast two-hybrid analysis. The Mirk-RanBPM association was confirmed by glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays, co-immunoprecipitation studies, and in vivo cross-linking. Met plays an important role in tumor cell invasion and cell migration. RanBPM has been reported to bind to the tyrosine kinase domain of the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor Met, enhance Met downstream signaling, and enhance HGF-induced A704 kidney carcinoma cell invasion (Wang, D., Li, Z., Messing, E. M., and Wu, G. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 36216-36222). We made a stable Mirk-inducible subline from nontransformed Mv1Lu lung epithelial cells and now demonstrate that induction of Mirk inhibited the migration of these cells in wounding experiments and inhibited their invasion through polycarbonate Transwell filters. Furthermore the ability of Mirk to inhibit Mv1Lu cell migration was attenuated when cells were exposed to HGF or to elevated levels of transiently expressed RanBPM. RanBPM inhibited the kinase activity of Mirk/Dyrk1B and Dyrk1A. In addition, RanBPM and HGF inhibited the function of Mirk as a transcriptional coactivator. Our findings suggest that Mirk plays a role in modulating cell migration through opposing the action of the Met signaling cascade adaptor protein RanBPM.

14521924|a|A 3(')-terminal fragment of a splice variant of KIAA0641, a human homologue of apoptosis-associated tyrosine kinase (AATYK), was screened from human brain cDNA libraries by a yeast two-hybrid system using a Cdk5 activator p35 as a bait. The cloned cDNA encoded 477 amino acids, composed of internal 458 amino acids of KIAA0641 and 19 amino acids unique to this variant after splicing, then referred to this clone as hAATYKs-p35BP (human AATYK short isoform-p35 binding polypeptide). Using GST-fusion protein, hAATYKs-p35BP was shown to bind to Cdk5/p35 in a rat brain extract. hAATYKs made by fusing the kinase domain of KIAA0641 to the N-terminus of hAATYKs-p35BP was used for binding to Cdk5/p35 in HEK293 cells. Both hAATYKs and KIAA0641 bound to and were phosphorylated by Cdk5/p35. These results suggest that both isoforms of hAATYK are novel Cdk5/p35-binding and substrate proteins.

14676191|a|The polarization of eukaryotic cells is controlled by the concerted activities of asymmetrically localized proteins. The PAR proteins, first identified in Caenorhabditis elegans, are common regulators of cell polarity conserved from nematode and flies to man. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms by which these proteins and protein complexes establish cell polarity in mammals. We have mapped multiprotein complexes formed around the putative human Par orthologs MARK4 (microtubule-associated protein/microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 4) (Par-1), Par-3, LKB1 (Par-4), 14-3-3zeta and eta (Par-5), Par-6a, -b, -c, and PKClambda (PKC3). We employed a proteomic approach comprising tandem affinity purification (TAP) of protein complexes from cultured cells and protein sequencing by tandem mass spectrometry. From these data we constructed a highly interconnected protein network consisting of three core complex "modules" formed around MARK4 (Par-1), Par-3.Par-6, and LKB1 (Par-4). The network confirms most previously reported interactions. In addition we identified more than 50 novel interactors, some of which, like the 14-3-3 phospho-protein scaffolds, occur in more than one distinct complex. We demonstrate that the complex formation between LKB1.Par-4, PAPK, and Mo25 results in the translocation of LKB1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and to tight junctions and show that the LKB1 complex may activate MARKs, which are known to introduce 14-3-3 binding sites into several substrates. Our findings suggest co-regulation and/or signaling events between the distinct Par complexes and provide a basis for further elucidation of the molecular mechanisms that govern cell polarity.

12907755|a|Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) play key roles in switching off tyrosine phosphorylation cascades, such as initiated by cytokine receptors. We have used substrate-trapping mutants of a large set of PTPs to identify members of the PTP family that have substrate specificity for the phosphorylated human GH receptor (GHR) intracellular domain. Among 31 PTPs tested, T cell (TC)-PTP, PTP-beta, PTP1B, stomach cancer-associated PTP 1 (SAP-1), Pyst-2, Meg-2, and PTP-H1 showed specificity for phosphorylated GHR that had been produced by coexpression with a kinase in bacteria. We then used GH-induced, phosphorylated GH receptor, purified from overexpressing mammalian cells, in a Far Western-based approach to test whether these seven PTPs were also capable of recognizing ligand-induced, physiologically phosphorylated GHR. In this assay, only TC-PTP, PTP1B, PTP-H1, and SAP-1 interacted with the mature form of the phosphorylated GHR. In parallel, we show that these PTPs recognize very different subsets of the seven GHR tyrosines that are potentially phosphorylated. Finally, mRNA tissue distribution of these PTPs by RT-PCR analysis and coexpression of the wild-type PTPs to test their ability to dephosphorylate ligand-activated GHR suggest PTP-H1 and PTP1B as potential candidates involved in GHR signaling.

23937259|a|A cluster of phosphorylation sites in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2), including Ser910, Ser935, Ser955 and Ser973, is important for PD (Parkinson's disease) pathogenesis as several PD-linked LRRK2 mutants are dephosphorylated at these sites. LRRK2 is also dephosphorylated in cells after pharmacological inhibition of its kinase activity, which is currently proposed as a strategy for disease-modifying PD therapy. Despite this importance of LRRK2 dephosphorylation in mutant LRRK2 pathological mechanism(s) and in LRRK2's response to inhibition, the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown. Therefore we aimed to identify the phosphatase for LRRK2. Using a panel of recombinant phosphatases, we found that PP1 (protein phosphatase 1) efficiently dephosphorylates LRRK2 in vitro. PP1 activity on LRRK2 dephosphorylation was confirmed in cells using PP1 inhibition to reverse LRRK2 dephosphorylation induced by the potent LRRK2 kinase inhibitor LRRK2-IN1 as well as in R1441G mutant LRRK2. We also found that PP1 and LRRK2 can form a complex in cells. Furthermore, we observed that PP1 inhibition modulates LRRK2's cellular phenotype by reducing skein-like LRRK2-positive structures associated with dephosphorylation. In conclusion, the present study reveals PP1 as the physiological LRRK2 phosphatase, responsible for LRRK2 dephosphorylation observed in PD mutant LRRK2 and after LRRK2 kinase inhibition.

19398576|a|Protein N(alpha)-terminal acetylation is one of the most common protein modifications in eukaryotic cells. In yeast, three major complexes, NatA, NatB, and NatC, catalyze nearly all N-terminal acetylation, acetylating specific subsets of protein N termini. In human cells, only the NatA and NatB complexes have been described. We here identify and characterize the human NatC (hNatC) complex, containing the catalytic subunit hMak3 and the auxiliary subunits hMak10 and hMak31. This complex associates with ribosomes, and hMak3 acetylates Met-Leu protein N termini in vitro, suggesting a model in which the human NatC complex functions in cotranslational N-terminal acetylation. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of NatC subunits results in p53-dependent cell death and reduced growth of human cell lines. As a consequence of hMAK3 knockdown, p53 is stabilized and phosphorylated and there is a significant transcriptional activation of proapoptotic genes downstream of p53. Knockdown of hMAK3 alters the subcellular localization of the Arf-like GTPase hArl8b, supporting that hArl8b is a hMak3 substrate in vivo. Taken together, hNatC-mediated N-terminal acetylation is important for maintenance of protein function and cell viability in human cells.

19387490|a|The elongation competence of the RNA polymerase II complex is critically dependent on the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). P-TEFb exists in two forms in cells, an active form composed of cyclin T1 and CDK9 and an inactive form, in which cyclin T1/CDK9 is sequestered by Hexim1 and 7SK snRNA. Here, we report that partitioning of active and inactive P-TEFb is regulated by acetylation of cyclin T1. Cyclin T1 acetylation triggers dissociation of Hexim1 and 7SK snRNA from cyclin T1/CDK9 and activates the transcriptional activity of P-TEFb. This activation is lost in P-TEFb complexes containing cyclin T1 that can no longer be acetylated. An acetylation-deficient cyclin T1 mutant dominantly suppresses NF-kappaB-mediated activation of the interleukin-8 promoter but continues to synergize normally with the HIV Tat protein to transactivate the HIV long terminal repeat. These findings support the model that acetylation of cyclin T1 serves as a physiological switch that liberates P-TEFb from its endogenous inhibitors Hexim1 and 7SK snRNA, but is not required for the cooperative action with HIV Tat.

19424295|a|Proper regulation of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A, PKA) is necessary for cellular homeostasis, and dysregulation of this kinase is crucial in human disease. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking the PKA regulatory subunit Prkar1a show altered cell morphology and enhanced migration. At the molecular level, these cells showed increased phosphorylation of cofilin, a crucial modulator of actin dynamics, and these changes could be mimicked by stimulating the activity of PKA. Previous studies of cofilin have shown that it is phosphorylated primarily by the LIM domain kinases Limk1 and Limk2, which are under the control of the Rho GTPases and their downstream effectors. In Prkar1a(-/-) MEFs, neither Rho nor Rac was activated; rather, we showed that PKA could directly phosphorylate Limk1 and thus enhance the phosphorylation of cofilin. These data indicate that PKA is crucial in cell morphology and migration through its ability to modulate directly the activity of LIM kinase.

19494339|a|The highly co-evolved relationship of parasites and their hosts appears to include modulation of host immune signals, although the molecular mechanisms involved in the host-parasite interplay remain poorly understood. Characterization of these key genes and their cognate proteins related to the host-parasite interplay should lead to a better understanding of this intriguing biological phenomenon. The malaria agent Plasmodium falciparum is predicted to export a cohort of several hundred proteins to remodel the host erythrocyte. However, proteins actively exported by the asexual intracellular parasite beyond the host red blood cell membrane (before merozoite egress) have been poorly investigated so far. Here we used two complementary methodologies, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis/MS and LC-MS/MS, to examine the extracellular secreted antigens at asexual blood stages of P. falciparum. We identified 27 novel antigens exported by P. falciparum in the culture medium of which some showed clustering with highly polymorphic genes on chromosomes, suggesting that they may encode putative antigenic determinants of the parasite. Immunolocalization of four novel secreted proteins confirmed their export beyond the infected red blood cell membrane. Of these, preliminary functional characterization of two novel (Sel1 repeat-containing) parasite proteins, PfSEL1 and PfSEL2 revealed that they down-regulate expression of cell surface Notch signaling molecules in host cells. Also a novel protein kinase (PfEK) and a novel protein phosphatase (PfEP) were found to, respectively, phosphorylate/dephosphorylate parasite-specific proteins in the extracellular culture supernatant. Our study thus sheds new light on malaria parasite extracellular secreted antigens of which some may be essential for parasite development and could constitute promising new drug targets.

19435804|a|Cajal bodies (CBs) are nuclear structures that are thought to have diverse functions, including small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) biogenesis. The phosphorylation status of coilin, the CB marker protein, might impact CB formation. We hypothesize that primary cells, which lack CBs, contain different phosphoisoforms of coilin compared with that found in transformed cells, which have CBs. Localization, self-association and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) studies on coilin phosphomutants all suggest this modification impacts the function of coilin and may thus contribute towards CB formation. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis demonstrates that coilin is hyperphosphorylated in primary cells compared with transformed cells. mRNA levels of the nuclear phosphatase PPM1G are significantly reduced in primary cells and expression of PPM1G in primary cells induces CBs. Additionally, PPM1G can dephosphorylate coilin in vitro. Surprisingly, however, expression of green fluorescent protein alone is sufficient to form CBs in primary cells. Taken together, our data support a model whereby coilin is the target of an uncharacterized signal transduction cascade that responds to the increased transcription and snRNP demands found in transformed cells.

19527717|a|Indiscriminately suppressing total c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity is not an appropriate strategy because each JNK appears to have a distinct function in cancer, asthma, diabetes, or Parkinson's disease. Herein, we report that 7-(6-N-phenylaminohexyl)amino-2H-anthra[1,9-cd]pyrazol-6-one (AV-7) inhibited JNK1 activity, but not JNK2 or JNK3. We found that ultraviolet B (UVB) induced c-Jun phosphorylation and sub-G1 accumulation in JNK2(-/-) murine embryonic fibroblasts, which contain an abundance of JNK1, but not JNK2. These results demonstrate that AV-7 is an isoform selective small-molecule inhibitor of JNK1 activity, which might be developed as a therapeutic against diabetes.

19407811|a|Regulation of BubR1 is central to the control of APC/C activity. We have found that BubR1 forms a complex with PCAF and is acetylated at lysine 250. Using mass spectrometry and acetylated BubR1-specific antibodies, we have confirmed that BubR1 acetylation occurs at prometaphase. Importantly, BubR1 acetylation was required for checkpoint function, through the inhibition of ubiquitin-dependent BubR1 degradation. BubR1 degradation began before the onset of anaphase. It was noted that the pre-anaphase degradation was regulated by BubR1 acetylation. Degradation of an acetylation-mimetic form, BubR1-K250Q, was inhibited and chromosome segregation in cells expressing BubR1-K250Q was markedly delayed. By contrast, the acetylation-deficient mutant, BubR1-K250R, was unstable, and mitosis was accelerated in BubR1-K250R-expressing cells. Furthermore, we found that APC/C-Cdc20 was responsible for BubR1 degradation during mitosis. On the basis of our collective results, we propose that the acetylation status of BubR1 is a molecular switch that converts BubR1 from an inhibitor to a substrate of the APC/C complex, thus providing an efficient way to modulate APC/C activity and mitotic timing.

19373254|a|At least eight types of ubiquitin chain exist, and individual linkages affect distinct cellular processes. The only distinguishing feature of differently linked ubiquitin chains is their structure, as polymers of the same unit are chemically identical. Here, we have crystallized Lys 63-linked and linear ubiquitin dimers, revealing that both adopt equivalent open conformations, forming no contacts between ubiquitin molecules and thereby differing significantly from Lys 48-linked ubiquitin chains. We also examined the specificity of various deubiquitinases (DUBs) and ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs). All analysed DUBs, except CYLD, cleave linear chains less efficiently compared with other chain types, or not at all. Likewise, UBDs can show chain specificity, and are able to select distinct linkages from a ubiquitin chain mixture. We found that the UBAN (ubiquitin binding in ABIN and NEMO) motif of NEMO (NF-kappaB essential modifier) binds to linear chains exclusively, whereas the NZF (Npl4 zinc finger) domain of TAB2 (TAK1 binding protein 2) is Lys 63 specific. Our results highlight remarkable specificity determinants within the ubiquitin system.

19453375|a|Ca(2+) influx through NMDA-type glutamate receptor at excitatory synapses causes activation of post-synaptic Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II (CaMKII) and its translocation to the NR2B subunit of NMDA receptor. The major binding site for CaMKII on NR2B undergoes phosphorylation at Ser1303, in vivo. Even though some regulatory effects of this phosphorylation are known, the mode of dephosphorylation of NR2B-Ser1303 is still unclear. We show that phosphorylation status at Ser1303 enables NR2B to distinguish between the Ca(2+)/calmodulin activated form and the autonomously active Thr286-autophosphorylated form of CaMKII. Green fluorescent protein-alpha-CaMKII co-expressed with NR2B sequence in human embryonic kidney 293 cells was used to study intracellular binding between the two proteins. Binding in vitro was studied by glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assay. Thr286-autophosphorylated alpha-CaMKII or the autophosphorylation mimicking mutant, T286D-alpha-CaMKII, binds NR2B sequence independent of Ca(2+)/calmodulin unlike native wild-type alpha-CaMKII. We show enhancement of this binding by Ca(2+)/calmodulin. Phosphorylation or a phosphorylation mimicking mutation on NR2B (NR2B-S1303D) abolishes the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-independent binding whereas it allows the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent binding of alpha-CaMKII in vitro. Similarly, the autonomously active mutants, T286D-alpha-CaMKII and F293E/N294D-alpha-CaMKII, exhibited Ca(2+)-independent binding to non-phosphorylatable mutant of NR2B under intracellular conditions. We also show for the first time that phosphatases in the brain such as protein phosphatase 1 and protein phosphatase 2A dephosphorylate phospho-Ser1303 on NR2B.

19422382|a|Vascular ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channels are activated by cyclic AMP elevating vasodilators through protein kinase A (PKA). Direct channel phosphorylation is a critical mechanism, though the phosphatase opposing these effects is unknown. Previously, we reported that calcineurin, a Ca(2+)-dependent phosphatase, inhibits K(ATP) channels, though neither the site nor the calcineurin isoform involved is established. Given that the type-2 regulatory (RII) subunit of PKA is a substrate for calcineurin we considered whether calcineurin regulates channel activity through interacting with PKA.

19262565|a|Proper regulation of NF-kappaB activity is critical to maintain and balance the inflammatory response. Inactivation of the NF-kappaB complex relies in part on the proteasome-mediated degradation of promoter-bound NF-kappaB, but the detailed molecular mechanism initiating this process remains elusive. Here, we show that the methylation of the RelA subunit of NF-kappaB has an important function in this process. Lysine methyltransferase Set9 physically associates with RelA in vitro and in vivo in response to TNF-alpha stimulation. Mutational and mass spectrometric analyses reveal that RelA is monomethylated by Set9 at lysine residues 314 and 315 in vitro and in vivo. Methylation of RelA inhibits NF-kappaB action by inducing the proteasome-mediated degradation of promoter-associated RelA. Depletion of Set9 by siRNA or mutation of the RelA methylation sites prolongs DNA binding of NF-kappaB and enhances TNF-alpha-induced expression of NF-kappaB target genes. Together, these findings unveil a novel mechanism by which methylation of RelA dictates the turnover of NF-kappaB and controls the NF-kappaB-mediated inflammatory response.

19478061|a|Tyrosine phosphorylation plays a critical role in regulating cellular function and is a central feature in signaling cascades involved in oncogenesis. The regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation is coordinately controlled by kinases and phosphatases (PTPs). Whereas activation of tyrosine kinases has been shown to play vital roles in tumor development, the role of PTPs is much less well defined. Here, we show that the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase delta (PTPRD) is frequently inactivated in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a deadly primary neoplasm of the brain. PTPRD is a target of deletion in GBM, often via focal intragenic loss. In GBM tumors that do not possess deletions in PTPRD, the gene is frequently subject to cancer-specific epigenetic silencing via promoter CpG island hypermethylation (37%). Sequencing of the PTPRD gene in GBM and other primary human tumors revealed that the gene is mutated in 6% of GBMs, 13% of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, and in 9% of lung cancers. These mutations were deleterious. In total, PTPRD inactivation occurs in >50% of GBM tumors, and loss of expression predicts for poor prognosis in glioma patients. Wild-type PTPRD inhibits the growth of GBM and other tumor cells, an effect not observed with PTPRD alleles harboring cancer-specific mutations. Human astrocytes lacking PTPRD exhibited increased growth. PTPRD was found to dephosphorylate the oncoprotein STAT3. These results implicate PTPRD as a tumor suppressor on chromosome 9p that is involved in the development of GBMs and multiple human cancers.

19503079|a|Constitutive heterochromatin in Arabidopsis thaliana is marked by repressive chromatin modifications, including DNA methylation, histone H3 dimethylation at Lys9 (H3K9me2) and monomethylation at Lys27 (H3K27me1). The enzymes catalyzing DNA methylation and H3K9me2 have been identified; alterations in these proteins lead to reactivation of silenced heterochromatic elements. The enzymes responsible for heterochromatic H3K27me1, in contrast, remain unknown. Here we show that the divergent SET-domain proteins ARABIDOPSIS TRITHORAX-RELATED PROTEIN 5 (ATXR5) and ATXR6 have H3K27 monomethyltransferase activity, and atxr5 atxr6 double mutants have reduced H3K27me1 in vivo and show partial heterochromatin decondensation. Mutations in atxr5 and atxr6 also lead to transcriptional activation of repressed heterochromatic elements. Notably, H3K9me2 and DNA methylation are unaffected in double mutants. These results indicate that ATXR5 and ATXR6 form a new class of H3K27 methyltransferases and that H3K27me1 represents a previously uncharacterized pathway required for transcriptional repression in Arabidopsis.

19357306|a|Aurora kinase-A and -B are key regulators of the cell cycle and tumorigenesis. It has remained a mystery why these 2 Aurora kinases, although highly similar in protein sequence and structure, are distinct in subcellular localization and function. Here, we report the striking finding that a single amino acid residue is responsible for these differences. We replaced the Gly-198 of Aurora-A with the equivalent residue Asn-142 of Aurora-B and found that in HeLa cells, Aurora-A(G198N) was recruited to the inner centromere in metaphase and the midzone in anaphase, reminiscent of the Aurora-B localization. Moreover, Aurora-A(G198N) compensated for the loss of Aurora-B in chromosome misalignment and cell premature exit from mitosis. Furthermore, Aurora-A(G198N) formed a complex with the Aurora-B partners, INCENP and Survivin, and its localization depended on this interaction. Aurora-A(G198N) phosphorylated the Aurora-B substrates INCENP and Survivin in vitro. Therefore, we propose that the presence of Gly or Asn at a single site assigns Aurora-A and -B to their respective partners and thus to their distinctive subcellular localizations and functions.

19412162|a|In response to DNA damage, eukaryotic cells initiate a complex signalling pathway, termed the DNA damage response (DDR), which coordinates cell cycle arrest with DNA repair. Studies have shown that oncogene-induced senescence, which provides a barrier to tumour development, involves activation of the DDR. Using a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen, we have identified 17 factors required for oncogenic BRAF to induce senescence in primary fibroblasts and melanocytes. One of these factors is an F-box protein, FBXO31, a candidate tumour suppressor encoded in 16q24.3, a region in which there is loss of heterozygosity in breast, ovarian, hepatocellular and prostate cancers. Here we study the cellular role of FBXO31, identify its target substrate and determine the basis for its growth inhibitory activity. We show that ectopic expression of FBXO31 acts through a proteasome-directed pathway to mediate the degradation of cyclin D1, an important regulator of progression from G1 to S phase, resulting in arrest in G1. Cyclin D1 degradation results from a direct interaction with FBXO31 and is dependent on the F-box motif of FBXO31 and phosphorylation of cyclin D1 at Thr 286, which is known to be required for cyclin D1 proteolysis. The involvement of the DDR in oncogene-induced senescence prompted us to investigate the role of FBXO31 in DNA repair. We find that DNA damage induced by gamma-irradiation results in increased FBXO31 levels, which requires phosphorylation of FBXO31 by the DDR-initiating kinase ATM. RNAi-mediated knockdown of FBXO31 prevents cells from undergoing efficient arrest in G1 after gamma-irradiation and markedly increases sensitivity to DNA damage. Finally, we show that a variety of DNA damaging agents all result in a large increase in FBXO31 levels, indicating that induction of FBXO31 is a general response to genotoxic stress. Our results reveal FBXO31 as a regulator of the G1/S transition that is specifically required for DNA damage-induced growth arrest.

19468300|a|To complete cell division with high fidelity, cytokinesis must be coordinated with chromosome segregation. Mammalian Polo-like kinase 1, Plk1, may function as a critical link because it is required for chromosome segregation and establishment of the cleavage plane following anaphase onset. A central spindle-localized pool of the RhoGEF Ect2 promotes activation of the small GTPase RhoA, which drives contractile ring assembly at the equatorial cortex. Here, we have investigated how Plk1 promotes the central spindle recruitment of Ect2. Plk1 phosphorylates the noncatalytic N terminus of the RhoGAP HsCyk-4 at the central spindle, creating a phospho-epitope recognized by the BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT) repeats of Ect2. Failure to phosphorylate HsCyk-4 blocks Ect2 recruitment to the central spindle and the subsequent induction of furrowing. Microtubules, as well as the microtubule-associated protein (MAP) Prc1, facilitate Plk1 phosphorylation of HsCyk-4. Characterization of a phosphomimetic version of HsCyk-4 indicates that Plk1 promotes Ect2 recruitment through multiple targets. Collectively, our data reveal that formation of the HsCyk-4-Ect2 complex is subject to multiple layers of regulation to ensure that RhoA activation occurs between the segregated sister chromatids during anaphase.

19264966|a|The E3 ubiquitin ligase Pellino can be activated by phosphorylation in vitro, catalyzed by IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1) or IRAK4. Here, we show that phosphorylation enhances the E3 ligase activity of Pellino 1 similarly with any of several E2-conjugating enzymes (Ubc13-Uev1a, UbcH4, or UbcH5a/5b) and identify 7 amino acid residues in Pellino 1 whose phosphorylation is critical for activation. Five of these sites are clustered between residues 76 and 86 (Ser-76, Ser-78, Thr-80, Ser-82, and Thr-86) and decorate a region of antiparallel beta-sheet, termed the "wing," which is an appendage of the forkhead-associated domain that is thought to interact with IRAK1. The other 2 sites are located at Thr-288 and Ser-293, just N-terminal to the RING-like domain that carries the E3 ligase activity. Unusually, the full activation of Pellino 1 can be achieved by phosphorylating any one of several different sites (Ser-76, Thr-86, Thr-288, or Ser-293) or a combination of other sites (Ser-78, Thr-80, and Ser-82). These observations imply that dephosphorylation of multiple sites is required to inactivate Pellino 1, which could be a device for prolonging Pellino's E3 ubiquitin ligase activity in vivo.

19468302|a|Animal cells initiate cytokinesis in parallel with anaphase onset, when an actomyosin ring assembles and constricts through localized activation of the small GTPase RhoA, giving rise to a cleavage furrow. Furrow formation relies on positional cues provided by anaphase spindle microtubules (MTs), but how such cues are generated remains unclear. Using chemical genetics to achieve both temporal and spatial control, we show that the self-organized delivery of Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) to the midzone and its local phosphorylation of a MT-bound substrate are critical for generating this furrow-inducing signal. When Plk1 was active but unable to target itself to this equatorial landmark, both cortical RhoA recruitment and furrow induction failed to occur, thus recapitulating the effects of anaphase-specific Plk1 inhibition. Using tandem mass spectrometry and phosphospecific antibodies, we found that Plk1 binds and directly phosphorylates the HsCYK-4 subunit of centralspindlin (also known as MgcRacGAP) at the midzone. At serine 157, this modification creates a major docking site for the tandem BRCT repeats of the Rho GTP exchange factor Ect2. Cells expressing only a nonphosphorylatable form of HsCYK-4 failed to localize Ect2 at the midzone and were severely impaired in cleavage furrow formation, implying that HsCYK-4 is Plk1's rate-limiting target upstream of RhoA. Conversely, tethering an inhibitor-resistant allele of Plk1 to HsCYK-4 allowed furrows to form despite global inhibition of all other Plk1 molecules in the cell. Our findings illuminate two key mechanisms governing the initiation of cytokinesis in human cells and illustrate the power of chemical genetics to probe such regulation both in time and space.

19435845|a|The US3 protein is a viral serine/threonine kinase that is conserved among all members of the Alphaherpesvirinae. The US3 protein of different alphaherpesviruses causes dramatic alterations in the actin cytoskeleton, such as the disassembly of actin stress fibers and formation of cell projections, which have been associated with increased intercellular virus spread. Here, we find that inhibiting group A p21-activated kinases (PAKs), which are key regulators in Cdc42/Rac1 Rho GTPase signaling pathways, impairs US3-mediated actin alterations. By using PAK1(-/-) and PAK2(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), we show that US3-mediated stress fiber disassembly requires PAK2, whereas US3-mediated cell projection formation mainly is mediated by PAK1, also indicating that PAK1 and PAK2 can have different biological effects on the organization of the actin cytoskeleton. In addition, US3 was found to bind and phosphorylate group A PAKs. Lack of group A PAKs in MEFs was correlated with inefficient virus spread. Thus, US3 induces its effect on the actin cytoskeleton via group A PAKs.

19470470|a|p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK1) is an effector of both Ras/MEK/MAPK and PI3K/PDK1 pathways. We present evidence that RSK1 drives p27 phosphorylation at T198 to increase RhoA-p27 binding and cell motility. RSK1 activation and p27pT198 both increase in early G(1). As for many kinase-substrate pairs, cellular RSK1 coprecipitates with p27. siRNA to RSK1 and RSK1 inhibition both rapidly reduce cellular p27pT198. RSK1 overexpression increases p27pT198, p27-cyclin D1-Cdk4 complexes, and p27 stability. Moreover, RSK1 transfectants show mislocalization of p27 to cytoplasm, increased motility, and reduced RhoA-GTP, phospho-cofilin, and actin stress fibers, all of which were reversed by shRNA to p27. Phosphorylation by RSK1 increased p27pT198 binding to RhoA in vitro, whereas p27T157A/T198A bound poorly to RhoA compared with WTp27 in cells. Coprecipitation of cellular p27-RhoA was increased in cells with constitutive PI3K activation and increased in early G(1). Thus T198 phosphorylation not only stabilizes p27 and mislocalizes p27 to the cytoplasm but also promotes RhoA-p27 interaction and RhoA pathway inhibition. These data link p27 phosphorylation at T198 and cell motility. As for other PI3K effectors, RSK1 phosphorylates p27 at T198. Because RSK1 is also activated by MAPK, the increased cell motility and metastatic potential of cancer cells with PI3K and/or MAPK pathway activation may result in part from RSK1 activation, leading to accumulation of p27T198 in the cytoplasm, p27:RhoA binding, inhibition of RhoA/Rock pathway activation, and loss of actomyosin stability.

19351902|a|The hereditary ataxias are a complex group of neurological disorders characterized by the degeneration of the cerebellum and its associated connections. The molecular mechanisms that trigger the loss of Purkinje cells in this group of diseases remain incompletely understood. Here, we report a previously undescribed dominant mouse model of cerebellar ataxia, moonwalker (Mwk), that displays motor and coordination defects and loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Mwk mice harbor a gain-of-function mutation (T635A) in the Trpc3 gene encoding the nonselective transient receptor potential cation channel, type C3 (TRPC3), resulting in altered TRPC3 channel gating. TRPC3 is highly expressed in Purkinje cells during the phase of dendritogenesis. Interestingly, growth and differentiation of Purkinje cell dendritic arbors are profoundly impaired in Mwk mice. Our findings define a previously unknown role for TRPC3 in both dendritic development and survival of Purkinje cells, and provide a unique mechanism underlying cerebellar ataxia.

19282482|a|Inheritance of epigenetic information encoded by cytosine DNA methylation patterns is crucial for mammalian cell survival, in large part through the activity of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1). Here, we show that SET7, a known histone methyltransferase, is involved in the regulation of protein stability of DNMT1. SET7 colocalizes and directly interacts with DNMT1 and specifically monomethylates Lys-142 of DNMT1. Methylated DNMT1 peaks during the S and G(2) phases of the cell cycle and is prone to proteasome-mediated degradation. Overexpression of SET7 leads to decreased DNMT1 levels, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of SET7 stabilizes DNMT1. These results demonstrate that signaling through SET7 represents a means of DNMT1 enzyme turnover.

19274063|a|POU transcription factor OCT4 not only plays an essential role in maintaining the pluripotent and self-renewing state of embryonic stem (ES) cells but also acts as a cell fate determinant through a gene dosage effect. However, the molecular mechanisms that control the intracellular OCT4 protein level remain elusive. Here, we report that human WWP2, an E3 ubiquitin (Ub)-protein ligase, interacts with OCT4 specifically through its WW domain and enhances Ub modification of OCT4 both in vitro and in vivo. We first demonstrated that endogenous OCT4 in human ES cells can be post-translationally modified by Ub. Furthermore, we found that WWP2 promoted degradation of OCT4 through the 26S proteasome in a dosage-dependent manner, and the active site cysteine residue of WWP2 was required for both its enzymatic activity and proteolytic effect on OCT4. Remarkably, our data show that the endogenous OCT4 protein level was significantly elevated when WWP2 expression was downregulated by specific RNA interference (RNAi), suggesting that WWP2 is an important regulator for maintaining a proper OCT4 protein level in human ES cells. Moreover, northern blot analysis showed that the WWP2 transcript was widely present in diverse human tissues/organs and highly expressed in undifferentiated human ES cells. However, its expression level was quickly decreased after human ES cells differentiated, indicating that WWP2 expression might be developmentally regulated. Our findings demonstrate that WWP2 is an important regulator of the OCT4 protein level in human ES cells.

19345186|a|Nurr1, an orphan nuclear receptor, plays an essential role in the generation and maintenance of dopaminergic neurons in the brain. Rare mutations in Nurr1 are associated with familial Parkinson's disease, but the underlying basis for this relationship has not been established. Here, we demonstrate that Nurr1 unexpectedly functions to inhibit expression of pro-inflammatory neurotoxic mediators in both microglia and astrocytes. Reduced Nurr1 expression results in exaggerated inflammatory responses in microglia that are further amplified by astrocytes, leading to the production of factors that cause death of tyrosine hydroxylase-expressing neurons. Nurr1 exerts anti-inflammatory effects by docking to NF-kappaB-p65 on target inflammatory gene promoters in a signal-dependent manner. Subsequently, Nurr1 recruits the CoREST corepressor complex, resulting in clearance of NF-kappaB-p65 and transcriptional repression. These studies suggest that Nurr1 protects against loss of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson's disease in part by limiting the production of neurotoxic mediators by microglia and astrocytes.

19303849|a|Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is a central enzyme in lipogenesis and transcriptionally activated in response to feeding and insulin signaling. The transcription factor USF is required for the activation of FAS transcription, and we show here that USF phosphorylation by DNA-PK, which is dephosphorylated by PP1 in response to feeding, triggers a switch-like mechanism. Under fasting conditions, USF-1 is deacetylated by HDAC9, causing promoter inactivation. In contrast, feeding induces the recruitment of DNA-PK to USF-1 and its phosphorylation, which then allows recruitment of P/CAF, resulting in USF-1 acetylation and FAS promoter activation. DNA break/repair components associated with USF induce transient DNA breaks during FAS activation. In DNA-PK-deficient SCID mice, feeding-induced USF-1 phosphorylation/acetylation, DNA breaks, and FAS activation leading to lipogenesis are impaired, resulting in decreased triglyceride levels. Our study demonstrates that a kinase central to the DNA damage response mediates metabolic gene activation.

19303846|a|The Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) gene is disrupted by a balanced chromosomal translocation (1; 11) (q42; q14.3) in a Scottish family with a high incidence of major depression, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. Subsequent studies provided indications that DISC1 plays a role in brain development. Here, we demonstrate that suppression of DISC1 expression reduces neural progenitor proliferation, leading to premature cell cycle exit and differentiation. Several lines of evidence suggest that DISC1 mediates this function by regulating GSK3beta. First, DISC1 inhibits GSK3beta activity through direct physical interaction, which reduces beta-catenin phosphorylation and stabilizes beta-catenin. Importantly, expression of stabilized beta-catenin overrides the impairment of progenitor proliferation caused by DISC1 loss of function. Furthermore, GSK3 inhibitors normalize progenitor proliferation and behavioral defects caused by DISC1 loss of function. Together, these results implicate DISC1 in GSK3beta/beta-catenin signaling pathways and provide a framework for understanding how alterations in this pathway may contribute to the etiology of psychiatric disorders.

19410543|a|H2B ubiquitylation has been implicated in active transcription but is not well understood in mammalian cells. Beyond earlier identification of hBRE1 as the E3 ligase for H2B ubiquitylation in human cells, we now show (1) that hRAD6 serves as the cognate E2-conjugating enzyme; (2) that hRAD6, through direct interaction with hPAF-bound hBRE1, is recruited to transcribed genes and ubiquitylates chromatinized H2B at lysine 120; (3) that hPAF-mediated transcription is required for efficient H2B ubiquitylation as a result of hPAF-dependent recruitment of hBRE1-hRAD6 to the Pol II transcription machinery; (4) that H2B ubiquitylation per se does not affect the level of hPAF-, SII-, and p300-dependent transcription and likely functions downstream; and (5) that H2B ubiquitylation directly stimulates hSET1-dependent H3K4 di- and trimethylation. These studies establish the natural H2B ubiquitylation factors in human cells and also detail the mechanistic basis for H2B ubiquitylation and function during transcription.

23979715|a|Drebrin is an actin filament (F-actin)-binding protein with crucial roles in neuritogenesis and synaptic plasticity. Drebrin couples dynamic microtubules to F-actin in growth cone filopodia via binding to the microtubule-binding +TIP protein EB3 and organizes F-actin in dendritic spines. Precisely how drebrin interacts with F-actin and how this is regulated is unknown. We used cellular and in vitro assays with a library of drebrin deletion constructs to map F-actin binding sites. We discovered two domains in the N-terminal half of drebrin-a coiled-coil domain and a helical domain-that independently bound to F-actin and cooperatively bundled F-actin. However, this activity was repressed by an intramolecular interaction relieved by Cdk5 phosphorylation of serine 142 located in the coiled-coil domain. Phospho-mimetic and phospho-dead mutants of serine 142 interfered with neuritogenesis and coupling of microtubules to F-actin in growth cone filopodia. These findings show that drebrin contains a cryptic F-actin-bundling activity regulated by phosphorylation and provide a mechanistic model for microtubule-F-actin coupling. 

19345329|a|Expression of the PTEN tumor suppressor is frequently lost in breast cancer in the absence of mutation or promoter methylation through as yet undetermined mechanisms. In this study, we demonstrate that the Rak tyrosine kinase physically interacts with PTEN and phosphorylates PTEN on Tyr336. Knockdown of Rak enhanced the binding of PTEN to its E3 ligase NEDD4-1 and promoted PTEN polyubiquitination, leading to PTEN protein degradation. Notably, ectopic expression of Rak effectively suppressed breast cancer cell proliferation, invasion, and colony formation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. Furthermore, Rak knockdown was sufficient to transform normal mammary epithelial cells. Therefore, Rak acts as a bona fide tumor suppressor gene through the mechanism of regulating PTEN protein stability and function.

19524513|a|Programmed necrosis is a form of caspase-independent cell death whose molecular regulation is poorly understood. The kinase RIP1 is crucial for programmed necrosis, but also mediates activation of the prosurvival transcription factor NF-kappaB. We postulated that additional molecules are required to specifically activate programmed necrosis. Using a RNA interference screen, we identified the kinase RIP3 as a crucial activator for programmed necrosis induced by TNF and during virus infection. RIP3 regulates necrosis-specific RIP1 phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of RIP1 and RIP3 stabilizes their association within the pronecrotic complex, activates the pronecrotic kinase activity, and triggers downstream reactive oxygen species production. The pronecrotic RIP1-RIP3 complex is induced during vaccinia virus infection. Consequently, RIP3(-/-) mice exhibited severely impaired virus-induced tissue necrosis, inflammation, and control of viral replication. Our findings suggest that RIP3 controls programmed necrosis by initiating the pronecrotic kinase cascade, and that this is necessary for the inflammatory response against virus infections.

19427028|a|Cell-surface death receptors such as DR4 and DR5 trigger apoptosis through a death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) that recruits the apical protease caspase-8. Apoptosis commitment requires efficient activation and autocatalytic release of caspase-8 into the cytoplasm to engage executioner caspases. While DISC recruitment initiates caspase-8 stimulation, full activation of the protease depends on further molecular aggregation events that are not fully understood. Here, we show that death receptor ligation induces polyubiquitination of caspase-8, through a previously unknown interaction of the DISC with a cullin3 (CUL3)-based E3 ligase. CUL3-mediated caspase-8 polyubiquitination required the RING box protein RBX1, whereas the deubiquitinase A20 reversed this modification. The ubiquitin-binding protein p62/sequestosome-1 promoted aggregation of CUL3-modified caspase-8 within p62-dependent foci, leading to full activation and processing of the enzyme and driving commitment to cell death. These results identify a mechanism that positively controls apoptosis signaling by polyubiquitination and aggregation of a key initiator caspase.

11836499|a|The breast cancer tumor-suppressor gene, BRCA1, encodes a protein with a BRCT domain-a motif that is found in many proteins that are implicated in DNA damage response and in genome stability. Phosphorylation of BRCA1 by the DNA damage-response proteins ATM, ATR and hCds1/Chk2 changes in response to DNA damage and at replication-block checkpoints. Although cells that lack BRCA1 have an abnormal response to DNA damage, the exact role of BRCA1 in this process has remained unclear. Here we show that BRCA1 is essential for activating the Chk1 kinase that regulates DNA damage-induced G2/M arrest. Thus, BRCA1 controls the expression, phosphorylation and cellular localization of Cdc25C and Cdc2/cyclin B kinase-proteins that are crucial for the G2/M transition. We show that BRCA1 regulates the expression of both Wee1 kinase, an inhibitor of Cdc2/cyclin B kinase, and the 14-3-3 family of proteins that sequesters phosphorylated Cdc25C and Cdc2/cyclin B kinase in the cytoplasm. We conclude that BRCA1 regulates key effectors that control the G2/M checkpoint and is therefore involved in regulating the onset of mitosis.

11836380|a|The herpes simplex virus type 1 gamma(1)34.5 gene product precludes the host-mediated protein shutoff response induced by activated protein kinase R (PKR). Earlier studies demonstrated that recombinant viruses lacking the gamma(1)34.5 gene (Deltagamma(1)34.5) developed secondary mutations that allowed earlier U(S)11 expression and enabled continued protein synthesis. Further, in vitro studies demonstrated that a recombinant expressed U(S)11 protein binds PKR, blocks the phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF-2alpha) by activated PKR, and, if provided prior to PKR activation, precluded PKR autophosphorylation. The present study furthers the hypothesis that early U(S)11 production precludes PKR-mediated host protein shutoff by demonstrating that (i) U(S)11 and PKR interact in the context of viral infection, (ii) this interaction is RNA dependent and requires a 30-amino-acid domain (amino acids 91 to 121) in the carboxyl domain of the U(S)11 protein, (iii) the proteins biochemically colocalize in the S100 ribosomal fraction, and (iv) there is a PKR substrate domain immediately adjacent to the binding domain. The results suggest that the U(S)11 interaction with PKR at the ribosome is RNA dependent and that the U(S)11 protein contains a substrate domain with homology to eIF-2alpha in close proximity to an essential binding domain.

23853094|a|Foxp3 is a transcription factor required for the development of regulatory T cells (Treg). Mice and humans with a loss of Foxp3 function suffer from uncontrolled autoimmunity and inflammatory disease. Expression of Foxp3 is necessary for the anti-inflammatory capacity of Treg, but whether Foxp3 activity is further subject to regulation by extracellular signals is unclear. The primary structure of Foxp3 contains four cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) motifs (Ser/Thr-Pro) within the N-terminal repressor domain, and we show that CDK2 can partner with cyclin E to phosphorylate Foxp3 at these sites. Consistent with our previous demonstration that CDK2 negatively regulates Treg function, we find that mutation of the serine or threonine at each CDK motif to alanine (S/T→A) results in enhanced Foxp3 protein stability in CD4(+) T cells. T cells expressing the S/T→A mutant of Foxp3 showed enhanced induction (e.g. CD25) and repression (e.g. IL2) of canonical Foxp3-responsive genes, exhibited an increased capacity to suppress conventional T cell proliferation in vitro, and were highly effective at ameliorating colitis in an in vivo model of inflammatory bowel disease. These results indicate that CDK2 negatively regulates the stability and activity of Foxp3 and implicate CDK-coupled receptor signal transduction in the control of regulatory T cell function and stability. 

11877377|a|Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) proteins (SMC1, SMC3) are evolutionarily conserved chromosomal proteins that are components of the cohesin complex, necessary for sister chromatid cohesion. These proteins may also function in DNA repair. Here we report that SMC1 is a component of the DNA damage response network that functions as an effector in the ATM/NBS1-dependent S-phase checkpoint pathway. SMC1 associates with BRCA1 and is phosphorylated in response to IR in an ATM- and NBS1-dependent manner. Using mass spectrometry, we established that ATM phosphorylates S957 and S966 of SMC1 in vivo. Phosphorylation of S957 and/or S966 of SMC1 is required for activation of the S-phase checkpoint in response to IR. We also discovered that the phosphorylation of NBS1 by ATM is required for the phosphorylation of SMC1, establishing the role of NBS1 as an adaptor in the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway. The ATM/CHK2/CDC25A pathway is also involved in the S-phase checkpoint activation, but this pathway is intact in NBS cells. Our results indicate that the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 pathway is a separate branch of the S-phase checkpoint pathway, distinct from the ATM/CHK2/CDC25A branch. Therefore, this work establishes the ATM/NBS1/SMC1 branch, and provides a molecular basis for the S-phase checkpoint defect in NBS cells.

11738026|a|Transport of synaptic components is a regulated process. Loss-of-function mutations in the C. elegans unc-16 gene result in the mislocalization of synaptic vesicle and glutamate receptor markers. unc-16 encodes a homolog of mouse JSAP1/JIP3 and Drosophila Sunday Driver. Like JSAP1/JIP3, UNC-16 physically interacts with JNK and JNK kinases. Deletion mutations in Caenorhabditis elegans JNK and JNK kinases result in similar mislocalization of synaptic vesicle markers and enhance weak unc-16 mutant phenotypes. unc-116 kinesin heavy chain mutants also mislocalize synaptic vesicle markers, as well as a functional UNC-16::GFP. Intriguingly, unc-16 mutations partially suppress the vesicle retention defect in unc-104 KIF1A kinesin mutants. Our results suggest that UNC-16 may regulate the localization of vesicular cargo by integrating JNK signaling and kinesin-1 transport.

11970898|a|Mice lacking the protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B are hypersensitive to insulin and resistant to obesity. However, the molecular basis for resistance to obesity has been unclear. Here we show that PTP1B regulates leptin signaling. In transfection studies, PTP1B dephosphorylates the leptin receptor-associated kinase, Jak2. PTP1B is expressed in hypothalamic regions harboring leptin-responsive neurons. Compared to wild-type littermates, PTP1B(-/-) mice have decreased leptin/body fat ratios, leptin hypersensitivity, and enhanced leptin-induced hypothalamic Stat3 tyrosyl phosphorylation. Gold thioglucose treatment, which ablates leptin-responsive hypothalamic neurons, partially overcomes resistance to obesity in PTP1B(-/-) mice. Our data indicate that PTP1B regulates leptin signaling in vivo, likely by targeting Jak2. PTP1B may be a novel target to treat leptin resistance in obesity.

12230472|a|Ligand-dependent endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) involves recruitment of a ubiquitin ligase, and sorting of ubiquitylated receptors to lysosomal degradation. By studying Hgs, a mammalian homolog of a yeast vacuolar-sorting adaptor, we provide information on the less understood, ligand-independent pathway of receptor endocytosis and degradation. Constitutive endocytosis involves receptor ubiquitylation and translocation to Hgs-containing endosomes. Whereas the lipid-binding motif of Hgs is necessary for receptor endocytosis, the ubiquitin-interacting motif negatively regulates receptor degradation. We demonstrate that the ubiquitin-interacting motif is endowed with two functions: it binds ubiquitylated proteins and it targets self-ubiquitylation by recruiting Nedd4, an ubiquitin ligase previously implicated in endocytosis. Based upon the dual function of the ubiquitin-interacting motif and its wide occurrence in endocytic adaptors, we propose a ubiquitin-interacting motif network that relays ubiquitylated membrane receptors to lysosomal degradation through successive budding events.

12042314|a|In many human cancers, the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) is expressed at low or undetectable levels. The decreased p27(Kip1) expression allows cyclin-dependent kinase activity to cause cells to enter into S phase and correlates with poor patient survival. Inhibition of serine/threonine kinase Akt signaling by some pharmacological agents or by PTEN induces G(1) arrest, in part by up-regulating p27(Kip1). However, the role of Akt-dependent phosphorylation in p27(Kip1) regulation is not clear. Here, we show that Akt bound directly to and phosphorylated p27(Kip1). Screening p27(Kip1) phosphorylation sites identified the COOH-terminal Thr(198) residue as a novel site. Further analysis revealed that 14-3-3 proteins bound to p27(Kip1) through Thr(198) only when it was phosphorylated by Akt. Although Akt also phosphorylated p27(Kip1) at Ser(10) and Thr(187), these two sites were not involved in the binding to 14-3-3 proteins. p27(Kip1) phosphorylated at Thr(198) exists only in the cytoplasm. Therefore, Akt promotes cell-cycle progression through the mechanisms of phosphorylation-dependent 14-3-3 binding to p27(Kip1) and cytoplasmic localization.

11923305|a|During mitosis, the catalytic activity of protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) alpha is enhanced, and its inhibitory binding to Grb2, which specifically blocks Src dephosphorylation, is decreased. These effects act synergistically to activate Src in mitosis. We show here that these effects are abrogated by mutation of Ser180 and/or Ser204, the sites of protein kinase C-mediated phosphorylation within PTPalpha. Moreover, either a Ser-to-Ala substitution or serine dephosphorylation specifically eliminated the ability of PTPalpha to dephosphorylate and activate Src even during interphase. This explains why the substitutions eliminated PTPalpha transforming activity, even though PTPalpha interphase dephosphorylation of nonspecific substrates was only slightly decreased. This occurred without change in the phosphorylation of PTPalpha at Tyr789, which is required for "phosphotyrosine displacement" during Src dephosphorylation. Thus, in addition to increasing PTPalpha nonspecific catalytic activity, Ser180 and Ser204 phosphorylation (along with Tyr789 phosphorylation) regulates PTPalpha substrate specificity. This involves serine phosphorylation-dependent differential modulation of the affinity of Tyr(P)789 for the Src and Grb2 SH2 domains. The results suggest that protein kinase C may participate in the mitotic activation of PTPalpha and Src and that there are intramolecular interactions between the PTPalpha C-terminal and membrane-proximal regions that are regulated, at least in part, by serine phosphorylation.

11588219|a|Although trafficking and degradation of several membrane proteins are regulated by ubiquitination catalyzed by E3 ubiquitin ligases, there has been little evidence connecting ubiquitination with regulation of mammalian G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein)-coupled receptor (GPCR) function. Agonist stimulation of endogenous or transfected beta2-adrenergic receptors (beta2ARs) led to rapid ubiquitination of both the receptors and the receptor regulatory protein, beta-arrestin. Moreover, proteasome inhibitors reduced receptor internalization and degradation, thus implicating a role for the ubiquitination machinery in the trafficking of the beta2AR. Receptor ubiquitination required beta-arrestin, which bound to the E3 ubiquitin ligase Mdm2. Abrogation of beta-arrestin ubiquitination, either by expression in Mdm2-null cells or by dominant-negative forms of Mdm2 lacking E3 ligase activity, inhibited receptor internalization with marginal effects on receptor degradation. However, a beta2AR mutant lacking lysine residues, which was not ubiquitinated, was internalized normally but was degraded ineffectively. These findings delineate an adapter role of beta-arrestin in mediating the ubiquitination of the beta2AR and indicate that ubiquitination of the receptor and of beta-arrestin have distinct and obligatory roles in the trafficking and degradation of this prototypic GPCR.

11717310|a|Nedd4 is a HECT domain-containing ubiquitin ligase that mediates ubiquitylation and proteasome degradation of target proteins. The molecular basis for the interaction of Nedd4 with substrates lies in its WW domains, which can bind proline-rich (PY) domains in target proteins. Nedd4 is a developmentally expressed protein and may have a fundamental role to play in embryonic processes. However, whether Nedd4 has such a function is currently unknown, in part because few developmentally regulated ubiquitylation substrates have been identified or characterized. We have carried out a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified four proteins expressed in the mid-gestation embryo that are able to interact with Nedd4. Characterization of their functional interaction with Nedd4 in vitro and in vivo demonstrated that three of the four are bona fide Nedd4 binding partners, and two have the capacity to be ubiquitylation substrates. One of these is the first identified nonviral substrate for Nedd4-mediated monoubiquitylation. Interestingly, neither of these two ubiquitylated proteins interacts with Nedd4 through PY-mediated mechanisms. For one of the three Nedd4 binding partners, there was no discernable evidence of ubiquitylation. However, this protein clearly associates with Nedd4 through its PY domains and can alter the location of Nedd4 in cells, suggesting a role other than as a ubiquitylation substrate.

11804596|a|The tumor suppressor p53 and its close relative p73 are activated in response to DNA damage resulting in either cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. Here, we show that DNA damage induces the acetylation of p73 by the acetyltransferase p300. Inhibiting the enzymatic activity of p300 hampers apoptosis in a p53(-/-) background. Furthermore, a nonacetylatable p73 is defective in activating transcription of the proapoptotic p53AIP1 gene but retains an intact ability to regulate other targets such as p21. Finally, p300-mediated acetylation of p73 requires the protooncogene c-abl. Our results suggest that DNA damage-induced acetylation potentiates the apoptotic function of p73 by enhancing the ability of p73 to selectively activate the transcription of proapoptotic target genes.

11988087|a|Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) play a vital role in cellular growth control, but far less is known about these signalling pathways in the context of embryonic development. Duration and magnitude of MAPK activation are crucial factors in cell fate decisions, and reflect a balance between the activities of upstream activators and specific MAPK phosphatases (MKPs). Here, we report the isolation and characterization of the murine Pyst3 gene, which encodes a cytosolic dual-specificity MKP. This enzyme selectively interacts with, and is catalytically activated by, the 'classical' extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) 1 and 2 and, to a lesser extent, the stress-activated MAPK p38alpha. These properties define the ability of this enzyme to dephosphorylate and inactivate ERK1/2 and p38alpha, but not JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) in vivo. When expressed in mammalian cells, the Pyst3 protein is predominantly cytoplasmic. Furthermore, leptomycin B causes a complete redistribution of the protein to the nucleus, implicating a CRM (chromosomal region maintenance)1/exportin 1-dependent nuclear export signal in determining the subcellular localization of this enzyme. Finally, whole-mount in situ hybridization studies in mouse embryos reveal that the Pyst3 gene is expressed specifically in the placenta, developing liver and in migratory muscle cells. Our results suggest that this enzyme may have a critical role in regulating the activity of MAPK signalling during early development and organogenesis.

12370829|a|The receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase DEP1, also known as CD148, is expressed predominantly in epithelial cells, in a variety of tumor cell lines, and in lymphocytes. Expression of DEP1 is enhanced at high cell density, and this observation suggests that DEP1 may function in the regulation of cell adhesion and possibly contact inhibition of cell growth. In order to investigate the function of DEP1, substrate-trapping mutants of the phosphatase were used to identify potential substrates. GST-fusion proteins containing the DEP1 catalytic domain with a substrate-trapping D/A mutation were found to interact with p120(ctn), a component of adherens junctions. DEP1 also interacted with other members of the catenin gene family including beta-catenin and gamma-catenin. The interaction with p120(ctn) is likely to be direct, as the interaction occurs in K562 cells lacking functional adherens junctions and E-cadherin expression. Catalytic domains of the tyrosine phosphatases PTP-PEST, CD45, and PTPbeta did not interact with proteins of the catenin family to detectable levels, suggesting that the interaction of DEP1 with these proteins is specific. DEP1 expression was concentrated at sites of cell-cell contact in A549 cells. p120(ctn) was found to colocalize with these structures. Together these data suggest an important role for DEP-1 in the function of cell-cell contacts and adherens junctions.

11591705|a|Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B)/Rel transcription factors are key regulators of a variety of genes involved in inflammatory responses, growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and development. There are increasing lines of evidence that NF-kappa B/Rel activity is controlled to a great extent by its phosphorylation state. In this study, we demonstrated that RelA physically associated with protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) subunit A (PR65). Both the N- and C-terminal regions of RelA were responsible for the PP2A binding. RelA co-immunoprecipitated with PP2A in melanocytes in the absence of stimulation, indicating that RelA forms a signaling complex with PP2A in the cells. RelA was dephosphorylated by a purified PP2A core enzyme, a heterodimer formed by the catalytic subunit of PP2A (PP2Ac) and PR65, in a concentration-dependent manner. Okadaic acid, an inhibitor of PP2A at lower concentration, increased the basal phosphorylation of RelA in melanocytes and blocked the dephosphorylation of RelA after interleukin-1 stimulation. Interestingly, PP2A immunoprecipitated from melanocytes was able to dephosphorylate RelA, whereas PP2A immunoprecipitated from melanoma cell lines exhibited decreased capacity to dephosphorylate RelA in vitro. Moreover, in melanoma cells in which I kappa B kinase activity was inhibited by sulindac to a similar level as in melanocytes, the phosphorylation state of RelA and the relative NF-kappa B activity were still higher than those in normal melanocytes. These data suggest that the constitutive activation of RelA in melanoma cells (Yang, J., and Richmond, A. (2001) Cancer Res. 61, 4901-4909) could be due, at least in part, to the deficiency of PP2A, which exhibits decreased dephosphorylation of NF-kappa B/RelA.

12237455|a|The activity of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) is restricted by their substrate specificities. The analysis of PTP specificity was greatly helped by the discovery that "substrate-trapping" PTP mutants, such as PTP-1B D181A, stably and specifically bind their substrates. We have set up a PTP substrate specificity assay based on the SPOT technique, which involves the microsynthesis of (phospho)peptides on membranes. To validate this approach, substrate trapping PTP-1B was tested on its cognate ligand, the autophosphorylated insulin receptor (IR). On SPOT membranes, IR peptides with phosphotyrosine 1163 were efficiently bound by PTP1B D181A, and dephosphorylated by PTP-1B. Phosphotyrosine 1163 was preferred over the neighboring 1158 and 1162 phosphotyrosines. PTP-1B also recognized IR-like motifs in Trk autophosphorylation domains, and STAT 5 phosphopeptides. Using a gridded 20-by-20 SPOT library, we show that peptides with the YZM motif (Z: phosphotyrosine) are the strongest ligands for PTP-1B D181A, but not the optimal substrates for dephosphorylation by wild-type PTP1B. In addition we show that PTP-1B and PTP-beta dephosphorylation efficiency is strongly modulated by the introduction of phospho-serine or phospho-threonine in their cognate phospho-tyrosine substrates. Altogether our data illustrate that the SPOT technique is a highly efficient tool for the study of PTP substrate specificity.

12062430|a|Casein kinase Ialpha (CKIalpha) belongs to a family of serine/threonine protein kinases involved in membrane trafficking, RNA processing, mitotic spindle formation and cell cycle progression. In this report, we identified several CKIalpha interacting proteins including RCC1, high mobility group proteins 1 and 2 (HMG1, HMG2), Erf, centaurin-alpha1, synaptotagmin IX and CPI-17 that were isolated from brain as CKIalpha co-purifying proteins. Actin, importin-alpha(1), importin-beta, PP2Ac, centaurin-alpha1, and HMG1 were identified by affinity chromatography using a peptide column comprising residues 214-233 of CKIalpha. We have previously shown that centaurin-alpha1 represents a CKIalpha partner both in vitro and in vivo. The nuclear protein regulator of chromosome condensation 1 (RCC1) is a guanosine nucleotide exchange factor for Ran which is involved in nuclear transport and mitotic spindle formation. Here we show that CKIalpha and RCC1 interact in brain and in cultured cells. However, the interaction does not involve residues 217-233 of CKIalpha which are proposed from X-ray structures to represent an anchoring site for CKI partners. Formation of the RCC1/CKIalpha complex is consistent with the association of the kinase with mitotic spindles. In conclusion, we have identified a number of novel CKIalpha protein partners and their relations to CKI are discussed.

11894096|a|Ligand-dependent downregulation of tyrosine kinase receptors is a critical step for modulating their activity. Upon ligand binding, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor (Met) is polyubiquitinated and degraded; however, the mechanisms underlying HGF receptor endocytosis are not yet known. Here we demonstrate that a complex involving endophilins, CIN85 and Cbl controls this process. Endophilins are regulatory components of clathrin-coated vesicle formation. Through their acyl-transferase activity they are thought to modify the membrane phospholipids and induce negative curvature and invagination of the plasma membrane during the early steps of endocytosis. Furthermore, by means of their Src-homology 3 domains, endophilins are able to bind CIN85, a recently identified protein that interacts with the Cbl proto-oncogene. Cbl, in turn, binds and ubiquitinates activated HGF receptor, and by recruiting the endophilin-CIN85 complex, it regulates receptor internalization. Inhibition of complex formation is sufficient to block HGF receptor internalization and to enhance HGF-induced signal transduction and biological responses. These data provide further evidence of a relationship between receptor-mediated signalling and endocytosis, and disclose a novel functional role for Cbl in HGF receptor signalling.

11923872|a|The p53 tumour suppressor is a short-lived protein that is maintained at low levels in normal cells by Mdm2-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent proteolysis. Stabilization of p53 is crucial for its tumour suppressor function. However, the precise mechanism by which ubiquitinated p53 levels are regulated in vivo is not completely understood. By mass spectrometry of affinity-purified p53-associated factors, we have identified herpesvirus-associated ubiquitin-specific protease (HAUSP) as a novel p53-interacting protein. HAUSP strongly stabilizes p53 even in the presence of excess Mdm2, and also induces p53-dependent cell growth repression and apoptosis. Significantly, HAUSP has an intrinsic enzymatic activity that specifically deubiquitinates p53 both in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, expression of a catalytically inactive point mutant of HAUSP in cells increases the levels of p53 ubiquitination and destabilizes p53. These findings reveal an important mechanism by which p53 can be stabilized by direct deubiquitination and also imply that HAUSP might function as a tumour suppressor in vivo through the stabilization of p53.

12198496|a|Semaphorins are cell surface and soluble signals that control axonal guidance. Recently, semaphorin receptors (plexins) have been discovered and shown to be widely expressed. Their biological activities outside the nervous system and the signal transduction mechanism(s) they utilize are largely unknown. Here, we show that in epithelial cells, Semaphorin 4D (Sema 4D) triggers invasive growth, a complex programme that includes cell#150;cell dissociation, anchorage-independent growth and branching morphogenesis. Interestingly, the same response is also controlled by scatter factors through their tyrosine kinase receptors, which share striking structural homology with plexins in their extracellular domain. We found that in cells expressing the endogenous proteins, Plexin B1 (the Sema 4D Receptor) and Met (the Scatter Factor 1/ Hepatocyte Growth Factor Receptor) associate in a complex. In addition, binding of Sema 4D to Plexin B1 stimulates the tyrosine kinase activity of Met, resulting in tyrosine phosphorylation of both receptors. Finally, cells lacking Met expression do not respond to Sema 4D unless exogenous Met is expressed. This work identifies a novel biological function of semaphorins and suggests the involvement of an unexpected signalling mechanism, namely, the coupling of a plexin to a tyrosine kinase receptor.

11882901|a|The interactions of distinct cofactor complexes with transcription factors are decisive determinants for the regulation of gene expression. Depending on the bound cofactor, transcription factors can have either repressing or transactivating activities. To allow a switch between these different states, regulated cofactor exchange has been proposed; however, little is known about the molecular mechanisms that are involved in this process. LIM homeodomain (LIM-HD) transcription factors associate with RLIM (RING finger LIM domain-binding protein) and with CLIM (cofactor of LIM-HD proteins; also known as NLI, Ldb and Chip) cofactors. The co-repressor RLIM inhibits the function of LIM-HD transcription factors, whereas interaction with CLIM proteins is important for the exertion of the biological activity conferred by LIM-HD transcription-factors. Here we identify RLIM as a ubiquitin protein ligase that is able to target CLIM cofactors for degradation through the 26S proteasome pathway. Furthermore, we demonstrate a ubiquitination-dependent association of RLIM with LIM-HD proteins in the presence of CLIM cofactors. Our data provide a mechanistic basis for cofactor exchange on DNA-bound transcription factors, and probably represent a general mechanism of transcriptional regulation.

12235133|a|Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein (WASp) is a key regulator of the Arp2/3 complex and the actin cytoskeleton in hematopoietic cells. WASp is capable of forming an auto-inhibited conformation, which can be disrupted by binding of Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, leading to its activation. Stimulation of the collagen receptor on platelets and crosslinking the B-cell receptor induce tyrosine phosphorylation of WASp. Here we show that the Src family kinase Hck induces phosphorylation of WASp-Tyr(291) independently of Cdc42 and that this causes a shift in the mobility of WASp upon SDS-PAGE. A phospho-mimicking mutant, WASp-Y291E, exhibited an enhanced ability to stimulate actin polymerization in a cell-free system and when microinjected into primary macrophages induced extensive filopodium formation with greater efficiency than wild-type WASp or a Y291F mutant. We propose that phosphorylation of Tyr(291) directly regulates WASp function.

11741893|a|We have cloned a novel human GCK family kinase that has been designated as MASK (Mst3 and SOK1-related kinase). MASK is widely expressed and encodes a protein of 416 amino acid residues, with an N-terminal kinase domain and a unique C-terminal region. Like other GCK-III subfamily kinases, MASK does not activate any mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Wild type MASK, but not a form lacking the C terminus, exhibits homophilic binding in the yeast two-hybrid system and in coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Additionally, deletion of this C-terminal region of MASK leads to an increased kinase activity toward itself as well as toward an exogenous substrate, myelin basic protein. A potential caspase 3 cleavage site (DESDS) is present in the C-terminal region of MASK, and we show that MASK is cleaved in vitro by caspase 3. Finally, wild type and C-terminally truncated forms of MASK can both induce apoptosis upon overexpression in mammalian cells that is abrogated by CrmA, suggesting involvement of MASK in the apoptotic machinery in mammalian cells.

12150926|a|mTOR controls cell growth, in part by regulating p70 S6 kinase alpha (p70alpha) and eukaryotic initiation factor 4E binding protein 1 (4EBP1). Raptor is a 150 kDa mTOR binding protein that also binds 4EBP1 and p70alpha. The binding of raptor to mTOR is necessary for the mTOR-catalyzed phosphorylation of 4EBP1 in vitro, and it strongly enhances the mTOR kinase activity toward p70alpha. Rapamycin or amino acid withdrawal increases, whereas insulin strongly inhibits, the recovery of 4EBP1 and raptor on 7-methyl-GTP Sepharose. Partial inhibition of raptor expression by RNA interference (RNAi) reduces mTOR-catalyzed 4EBP1 phosphorylation in vitro. RNAi of C. elegans raptor yields an array of phenotypes that closely resemble those produced by inactivation of Ce-TOR. Thus, raptor is an essential scaffold for the mTOR-catalyzed phosphorylation of 4EBP1 and mediates TOR action in vivo.

11980910|a|Mirk/Dyrk1B is an arginine-directed serine/threonine protein kinase that is expressed at low levels in most normal tissues but at elevated levels in many tumor cell lines and in normal skeletal muscle. Colon carcinoma cell lines stably overexpressing Mirk proliferated in serum-free medium, but the mechanism of Mirk action is unknown. DCoHm (dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha ( HNF1alpha) from muscle), a novel gene of the DCoH family with 78% amino acid identity to DCoH, was identified as a Mirk-binding protein by yeast two-hybrid analysis and cloned. Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with DCoHm and bound to DCoHm in glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays. DCoH stabilizes HNF1alpha as a dimer and enhances its transcriptional activity on the beta-fibrinogen promoter reporter, and DCoHm had similar activity. Mirk enhanced HNF1alpha transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner, whereas two kinase-inactive Mirk mutants and a Mirk N-terminal deletion mutant did not. Mirk, DCoHm, and HNF1alpha formed a complex. Mirk bound to a specific region within the CREB-binding protein-binding region of HNF1alpha and phosphorylated HNF1alpha at a site adjacent to the Mirk-binding region. Conversely, the HNF1alpha binding domain was located within the first five conserved kinase subdomains of Mirk. Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with the MAPK kinase MKK3, an upstream activator of p38. MKK3 enhanced Mirk kinase activity and the transcriptional activation of HNF1alpha by Mirk, suggesting that Mirk, like p38, is activated by certain environmental stress agents. The Mirk-binding protein DCoH has been shown to be selectively expressed in colon carcinomas but not in normal tissue. Mirk may function as an HNF1alpha transcriptional activator in response to an MKK3-mediated stress signal, and the selective expression of DCoH could restrict the Mirk response to carcinoma cells.

11788586|a|The nonreceptor Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) has been previously shown to associate physically and functionally with members of the protein kinase C (PKC) family of serine/threonine kinases in a variety of cell types. Here we show evidence for a novel interaction between Btk and PKCtheta; in platelets activated through the adhesion receptors GP Ib-V-IX and GP VI. Alboaggregin A, a snake venom component capable of activating both receptors in combination, leads to tyrosine phosphorylation of Btk downstream of Src family kinases. Inhibition of Btk by the selective antagonist LFM-A13 causes a reduction in calcium entry, although secretion of 5-hydroxytryptamine is potentiated. Btk is also phosphorylated on threonine residues in a PKC-dependent manner and associates with PKCtheta; upon platelet activation by either alboaggregin A or activation of GP Ib-V-IX alone by von Willebrand factor/ristocetin. PKCtheta; in turn becomes tyrosine-phosphorylated in a manner dependent upon Src family and Btk kinase activity. Inhibition of Btk activity by LFM-A13 leads to enhancement of PKCtheta; activity, whereas nonselective inhibition of PKC activity by bisindolylmaleimide I leads to reduction in Btk activity. We propose a reciprocal feedback interaction between Btk and PKCtheta; in platelets, in which PKCtheta; positively modulates activity of Btk, which in turn feeds back negatively upon PKCtheta;.

11791185|a|The ets-related gene erg encodes a transcription factor that is implicated in the control of cell growth and differentiation. To identify interacting partners of ERG, we screened a yeast two-hybrid cDNA library constructed from mouse hematopoietic cells using the N-terminal region of ERG as a bait. We isolated a 4.6 kb full-length mouse cDNA encoding a 1307-amino acid protein migrating as a 180 kD band, which was termed ESET (ERG-associated protein with SET domain). ESET is 92% identical to the human protein SETDB1 (SET domain, bifurcated 1). The interaction between ESET and ERG was supported by in vitro pull-down using glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein, by transfection and co-immunoprecipitation experiments, and by association of endogenous SETDB1 with ERG. Since ESET possesses evolutionarily conserved SET, preSET, and postSET domains implicated in histone methylation, we tested the ability of ESET to methylate core histones. The results of these studies demonstrated that ESET is a histone H3-specific methyltransferase, and that mutations within ESET abolished its methyltransferase activity. Together, these findings raise the possibility that transcription factor ERG may participate in transcriptional regulation through ESET-mediated histone methylation.

23949442|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a gene that, upon mutation, causes autosomal-dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Yeast two-hybrid screening revealed that Snapin, a SNAP-25 (synaptosomal-associated protein-25) interacting protein, interacts with LRRK2. An in vitro kinase assay exhibited that Snapin is phosphorylated by LRRK2. A glutathione-S-transferase (GST) pull-down assay showed that LRRK2 may interact with Snapin via its Ras-of-complex (ROC) and N-terminal domains, with no significant difference on interaction of Snapin with LRRK2 wild type (WT) or its pathogenic mutants. Further analysis by mutation study revealed that Threonine 117 of Snapin is one of the sites phosphorylated by LRRK2. Furthermore, a Snapin T117D phosphomimetic mutant decreased its interaction with SNAP-25 in the GST pull-down assay. SNAP-25 is a component of the SNARE (Soluble NSF Attachment protein REceptor) complex and is critical for the exocytosis of synaptic vesicles. Incubation of rat brain lysate with recombinant Snapin T117D, but not WT, protein caused decreased interaction of synaptotagmin with the SNARE complex based on a co-immunoprecipitation assay. We further found that LRRK2-dependent phosphorylation of Snapin in the hippocampal neurons resulted in a decrease in the number of readily releasable vesicles and the extent of exocytotic release. Combined, these data suggest that LRRK2 may regulate neurotransmitter release via control of Snapin function by inhibitory phosphorylation. 

11883897|a|The vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) protein is a nuclear Ser-Thr kinase that phosphorylates p53 in Thr18. We have determined the enzyme properties regarding its different substrates. VRK1 has a high affinity for ATP (K(m) 50 microM) and is thus saturated by the intracellular concentration of ATP in vivo. VRK1 uses preferentially magnesium, but is also functional with manganese and zinc. The VRK1 protein is autophosphorylated in multiple residues without effect on its activity. One autophosphorylated residue, T355, is within the VRK1 regulatory carboxy terminus. The kinase phosphorylates p53 with a K(m) of 1 microM and is well suited to respond to the variations of intracellular p53 concentration, which fluctuates as a response to different types of cellular stress.

26267535|a|Biomarkers for predicting prognosis are critical to treating colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. We found that CSN6, a subunit of COP9 signalosome, is overexpressed in CRC samples and that CSN6 overexpression is correlated with poor patient survival. Mechanistic studies revealed that CSN6 is deregulated by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling, in which ERK2 binds directly to CSN6 Leu163/Val165 and phosphorylates CSN6 at Ser148. Furthermore, CSN6 regulated β-Trcp and stabilized β-catenin expression by blocking the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, thereby promoting CRC development. High CSN6 expression was positively correlated with ERK2 activation and β-catenin overexpression in CRC samples, and inhibiting CSN6 stability with cetuximab reduced colon cancer growth. Taken together, our study's findings indicate that the deregulation of β-catenin by ERK2-activated CSN6 is important for CRC development. 

25923214|a|All types of DNA damage cause a local alteration and relaxation of chromatin structure. Sensing and reacting to this initial chromatin alteration is a necessary trigger for any type of DNA damage response (DDR). In this context, chromatin kinases are likely candidates to participate in detection and reaction to a locally altered chromatin as a consequence of DNA damage and, thus, initiate the appropriate cellular response. In this work, we demonstrate that VRK1 is a nucleosomal chromatin kinase and that its depletion causes loss of histones H3 and H4 acetylation, which are required for chromatin relaxation, both in basal conditions and after DNA damage, independently of ATM. Moreover, VRK1 directly and stably interacts with histones H2AX and H3 in basal conditions. In response to DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation, histone H2AX is phosphorylated in Ser139 by VRK1. The phosphorylation of H2AX and the formation of γH2AX foci induced by ionizing radiation (IR), are prevented by VRK1 depletion and are rescued by kinase-active, but not kinase-dead, VRK1. In conclusion, we found that VRK1 is a novel chromatin component that reacts to its alterations and participates very early in DDR, functioning by itself or in cooperation with ATM. 

26091039|a|The existence of extracellular phosphoproteins has been acknowledged for over a century. However, research in this area has been undeveloped largely because the kinases that phosphorylate secreted proteins have escaped identification. Fam20C is a kinase that phosphorylates S-x-E/pS motifs on proteins in milk and in the extracellular matrix of bones and teeth. Here, we show that Fam20C generates the majority of the extracellular phosphoproteome. Using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing, mass spectrometry, and biochemistry, we identify more than 100 secreted phosphoproteins as genuine Fam20C substrates. Further, we show that Fam20C exhibits broader substrate specificity than previously appreciated. Functional annotations of Fam20C substrates suggest roles for the kinase beyond biomineralization, including lipid homeostasis, wound healing, and cell migration and adhesion. Our results establish Fam20C as the major secretory pathway protein kinase and serve as a foundation for new areas of investigation into the role of secreted protein phosphorylation in human biology and disease.

26290419|a|Many proteins are known to promote ciliogenesis, but mechanisms that promote primary cilia disassembly before mitosis are largely unknown. Here we identify a mechanism that favours cilium disassembly and maintains the disassembled state. We show that co-localization of the S/G2 phase kinase, Nek2 and Kif24 triggers Kif24 phosphorylation, inhibiting cilia formation. We show that Kif24, a microtubule depolymerizing kinesin, is phosphorylated by Nek2, which stimulates its activity and prevents the outgrowth of cilia in proliferating cells, independent of Aurora A and HDAC6. Our data also suggest that cilium assembly and disassembly are in dynamic equilibrium, but Nek2 and Kif24 can shift the balance toward disassembly. Further, Nek2 and Kif24 are overexpressed in breast cancer cells, and ablation of these proteins restores ciliation in these cells, thereby reducing proliferation. Thus, Kif24 is a physiological substrate of Nek2, which regulates cilia disassembly through a concerted mechanism involving Kif24-mediated microtubule depolymerization. 

23793893|a|N-1 Methylation of the nearly invariant purine residue found at position 9 of tRNA is a nucleotide modification found in multiple tRNA species throughout Eukarya and Archaea. First discovered in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the tRNA methyltransferase Trm10 is a highly conserved protein both necessary and sufficient to catalyze all known instances of m1G9 modification in yeast. Although there are 19 unique tRNA species that contain a G at position 9 in yeast, and whose fully modified sequence is known, only 9 of these tRNA species are modified with m1G9 in wild-type cells. The elements that allow Trm10 to distinguish between structurally similar tRNA species are not known, and sequences that are shared between all substrate or all nonsubstrate tRNAs have not been identified. Here, we demonstrate that the in vitro methylation activity of yeast Trm10 is not sufficient to explain the observed pattern of modification in vivo, as additional tRNA species are substrates for Trm10 m1G9 methyltransferase activity. Similarly, overexpression of Trm10 in yeast yields m1G9 containing tRNA species that are ordinarily unmodified in vivo. Thus, yeast Trm10 has a significantly broader tRNA substrate specificity than is suggested by the observed pattern of modification in wild-type yeast. These results may shed light onto the suggested involvement of Trm10 in other pathways in other organisms, particularly in higher eukaryotes that contain up to three different genes with sequence similarity to the single TRM10 gene in yeast, and where these other enzymes have been implicated in pathways beyond tRNA processing.

26320581|a|Methylation of histone H3 lysine-4 is a hallmark of chromatin associated with active gene expression. The activity of H3K4-specific modification enzymes, in higher eukaryotes the MLL (or KMT2) family, is tightly regulated. The MLL family has six members, each with a specialized function. All contain a catalytic SET domain that associates with a core multiprotein complex for activation. These SET domains segregate into three classes that correlate with the arrangement of targeting domains that populate the rest of the protein. Here we show that, unlike MLL1, the MLL4 SET domain retains significant activity without the core complex. We also present the crystal structure of an inactive MLL4-tagged SET domain construct and describe conformational changes that account for MLL4 intrinsic activity. Finally, our structure explains how the MLL SET domains are able to add multiple methyl groups to the target lysine, despite having the sequence characteristics of a classical monomethylase. 

26256536|a|Kinases use ATP to phosphorylate substrates; recent findings underscore the additional regulatory roles of ATP. Here, we propose a mechanism for allosteric regulation of Akt1 kinase phosphorylation by ATP. Our 4.7-μs molecular dynamics simulations of Akt1 and its mutants in the ATP/ADP bound/unbound states revealed that ATP occupancy of the ATP-binding site stabilizes the closed conformation, allosterically protecting pT308 by restraining phosphatase access and key interconnected residues on the ATP→pT308 allosteric pathway. Following ATP→ADP hydrolysis, pT308 is exposed and readily dephosphorylated. Site-directed mutagenesis validated these predictions and indicated that the mutations do not impair PDK1 and PP2A phosphatase recruitment. We further probed the function of residues around pT308 at the atomic level, and predicted and experimentally confirmed that Akt1(H194R/R273H) double mutant rescues pathology-related Akt1(R273H). Analysis of classical Akt homologs suggests that this mechanism can provide a general model of allosteric kinase regulation by ATP; as such, it offers a potential avenue for allosteric drug discovery. 

26192437|a|Correct formation of the cell division axis requires the initial precise orientation of the mitotic spindle. Proper spindle orientation depends on centrosome maturation, and Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is known to play a crucial role in this process. However, the molecular mechanisms that function downstream of PLK1 are not well understood. Here we show that LRRK1 is a PLK1 substrate that is phosphorylated on Ser 1790. PLK1 phosphorylation is required for CDK1-mediated activation of LRRK1 at the centrosomes, and this in turn regulates mitotic spindle orientation by nucleating the growth of astral microtubules from the centrosomes. Interestingly, LRRK1 in turn phosphorylates CDK5RAP2(Cep215), a human homologue of Drosophila Centrosomin (Cnn), in its γ-tubulin-binding motif, thus promoting the interaction of CDK5RAP2 with γ-tubulin. LRRK1 phosphorylation of CDK5RAP2 Ser 140 is necessary for CDK5RAP2-dependent microtubule nucleation. Thus, our findings provide evidence that LRRK1 regulates mitotic spindle orientation downstream of PLK1 through CDK5RAP2-dependent centrosome maturation. 

26344546|a|Transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) can serve as an innate immunity against invading DNA viruses throughout Eukaryotes. Geminivirus code for TrAP protein to suppress the TGS pathway. Here, we identified an Arabidopsis H3K9me2 histone methyltransferase, Su(var)3-9 homolog 4/Kryptonite (SUVH4/KYP), as a bona fide cellular target of TrAP. TrAP interacts with the catalytic domain of KYP and inhibits its activity in vitro. TrAP elicits developmental anomalies phenocopying several TGS mutants, reduces the repressive H3K9me2 mark and CHH DNA methylation, and reactivates numerous endogenous KYP-repressed loci in vivo. Moreover, KYP binds to the viral chromatin and controls its methylation to combat virus infection. Notably, kyp mutants support systemic infection of TrAP-deficient Geminivirus. We conclude that TrAP attenuates the TGS of the viral chromatin by inhibiting KYP activity to evade host surveillance. These findings provide new insight on the molecular arms race between host antiviral defense and virus counter defense at an epigenetic level. 

16601676|a|The poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) is a unique translation initiation factor in that it binds to the mRNA 3' poly(A) tail and stimulates recruitment of the ribosome to the mRNA at the 5' end. PABP activity is tightly controlled by the PABP-interacting protein 2 (Paip2), which inhibits translation by displacing PABP from the mRNA. Here, we describe a close interplay between PABP and Paip2 protein levels in the cell. We demonstrate a mechanism for this co-regulation that involves an E3 ubiquitin ligase, EDD, which targets Paip2 for degradation. PABP depletion by RNA interference (RNAi) causes co-depletion of Paip2 protein without affecting Paip2 mRNA levels. Upon PABP knockdown, Paip2 interacts with EDD, which leads to Paip2 ubiquitination. Supporting a critical role for EDD in Paip2 degradation, knockdown of EDD expression by siRNA leads to an increase in Paip2 protein stability. Thus, we demonstrate that the turnover of Paip2 in the cell is mediated by EDD and is regulated by PABP. This mechanism serves as a homeostatic feedback to control the activity of PABP in cells.

16601693|a|TGF-beta signaling involves a wide array of signaling molecules and multiple controlling events. Scaffold proteins create a functional proximity of signaling molecules and control the specificity of signal transduction. While many components involved in the TGF-beta pathway have been elucidated, little is known about how those components are coordinated by scaffold proteins. Here, we show that Axin activates TGF-beta signaling by forming a multimeric complex consisting of Smad7 and ubiquitin E3 ligase Arkadia. Axin depends on Arkadia to facilitate TGF-beta signaling, as their small interfering RNAs reciprocally abolished the stimulatory effect on TGF-beta signaling. Specific knockdown of Axin or Arkadia revealed that Axin and Arkadia cooperate with each other in promoting Smad7 ubiquitination. Pulse-chase experiments further illustrated that Axin significantly decreased the half-life of Smad7. Axin also induces nuclear export of Smad7. Interestingly, Axin associates with Arkadia and Smad7 independently of TGF-beta signal, in contrast to its transient association with inactive Smad3. However, coexpression of Wnt-1 reduced Smad7 ubiquitination by downregulating Axin levels, underscoring the importance of Axin as an intrinsic regulator in TGF-beta signaling.

16644720|a|Rho GTPases are signal transduction effectors that control cell motility, cell attachment, and cell shape by the control of actin polymerization and tyrosine phosphorylation. To identify cellular targets regulated by Rho GTPases, we screened global protein responses to Rac1, Cdc42, and RhoA activation by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. A total of 22 targets were identified of which 19 had never been previously linked to Rho GTPase pathways, providing novel insight into pathway function. One novel target of RhoA was protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), which catalyzes dephosphorylation of key signaling molecules in response to activation of diverse pathways. Subsequent analysis demonstrated that RhoA enhances post-translational modification of PTP1B, inactivates phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity, and up-regulates tyrosine phosphorylation of p130Cas, a key mediator of focal adhesion turnover and cell migration. Thus, protein profiling reveals a novel role for PTP1B as a mediator of RhoA-dependent phosphorylation of p130Cas.

16616143|a|Occludin is an integral-membrane protein that contributes to tight junction function. We have identified casein kinase I epsilon (CKI epsilon) as a binding partner for the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of occludin by yeast two-hybrid screening. CKI epsilon phosphorylated occludin and co-localised and co-immunoprecipitated with occludin from human endothelial cells. Amino acids 265-318 of occludin were sufficient for CKI epsilon binding and phosphorylation. Deletion of the C-terminal 48 amino acids of occludin increased CKI epsilon binding and phosphorylation, suggesting that this region inhibits CKI epsilon binding. These data identify CKI epsilon as a novel occludin kinase that may be important for the regulation of occludin.

16641105|a|G protein-coupled receptors induce EGF receptor (EGFR) signaling, leading to the proliferation and invasion of cancer cells. Elucidation of the mechanism of EGFR activation by G protein-coupled receptors may identify new signaling paradigms. A gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP)/GRP receptor-mediated autocrine pathway was previously described in squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck. In the present study, we demonstrate that TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE), a disintegrin and metalloproteinse-17, undergoes a Src-dependent phosphorylation that regulates release of the EGFR ligand amphiregulin upon GRP treatment. Further investigation reveals the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) as the intermediate of c-Src and TACE, contributing to their association and TACE phosphorylation. Phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1), a downstream target of PI3-K, has been identified as the previously undescribed kinase to directly phosphorylate TACE upon GRP treatment. These findings suggest a signaling cascade of GRP-Src-PI3-K-PDK1-TACE-amphiregulin-EGFR with multiple points of interaction, translocation, and phosphorylation. Furthermore, knockdown of PDK1 augmented the antitumor effects of the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib, indicating PDK1 as a therapeutic target to improve the clinical response to EGFR inhibitors.

16627622|a|Sustained activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) and extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) both promote neuronal death. Here we identify a direct link between these two cell death pathways. In a rat model of hypoglycemic brain injury, neuronal PARP-1 activation and subsequent neuronal death were blocked by the ERK1/2 inhibitor 2-(2-amino-3-methoxyphenyl)-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (PD98059). In neuron cultures, PARP-1-mediated neuronal death induced by N-methyl-d-aspartate, peroxynitrite, or DNA alkylation was similarly blocked by ERK1/2 pathway inhibitors. These inhibitors also blocked PARP-1 activation and PARP-1-mediated death in astrocytes. siRNA down-regulation of ERK2 expression in astrocytes also blocked PARP-1 activation and cell death. Direct effects of ERK1/2 on PARP-1 were evaluated by using isolated recombinant enzymes. The activity of recombinant human PARP-1 was reduced by incubation with alkaline phosphatase and restored by incubation with active ERK1 or ERK2. Putative ERK1/2 phosphorylation sites on PARP-1 were identified by mass spectrometry. Using site-directed mutagenesis, these sites were replaced with alanine (S372A and T373A) to block phosphorylation, or with glutamate (S372E and T373E) to mimic constitutive phosphorylation. Transfection of PARP-1 deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts with the mutant PARP-1 species showed that the S372A and T373A mutations impaired PARP-1 activation, whereas the S372E and T373E mutations increased PARP-1 activity and eliminated the effect of ERK1/2 inhibitors on PARP-1 activation. These results suggest that PARP1 phosphorylation by ERK1/2 is required for maximal PARP-1 activation after DNA damage.

16611985|a|DNA topoisomerase II is an essential nuclear enzyme that modulates DNA processes by altering the topological state of double-stranded DNA. This enzyme is required for chromosome condensation and segregation; however, the regulatory mechanism of its activation is largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that topoisomerase IIalpha is activated in response to genotoxic stress. Concomitant with the activation, the expression of topoisomerase IIalpha is increased following DNA damage. The results also demonstrate that the proapoptotic kinase protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta) interacts with topoisomerase IIalpha. This association is in an S-phase-specific manner and is required for stabilization and catalytic activation of topoisomerase IIalpha in response to DNA damage. Conversely, inhibition of PKCdelta activity attenuates DNA damage-induced activation of topoisomerase IIalpha. Finally, aberrant activation of topoisomerase IIalpha by PKCdelta is associated with induction of apoptosis upon exposure to genotoxic agents. These findings indicate that PKCdelta regulates topoisomerase IIalpha and thereby cell fate in the genotoxic stress response.

16682949|a|The centrosome modulates spindle formation and plays a critical role in guiding proper segregation of chromosomes during cell division. Centrosome aberrations, frequently seen in human tumors, may cause abnormal chromosome segregation and contribute to malignant transformation. To explore the components of the centrosomes, we previously identified a novel centrosomal protein called Su48. To further characterize the Su48-containing protein ensemble in the centrosome, we performed yeast two-hybrid screens and isolated a number of Su48-interacting molecules, including the centrosomal protein Nde1. Here, we demonstrate that Su48 can associate with Nde1. Moreover, we found that Nde1 is subjected to phosphorylation in vivo. In particular, we identified six putative Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in Nde1 and found that alteration of these sites diminishes phosphorylation by Cdc2 in vitro and affects the stability of Su48-Nde1 interactions and the centrosomal localization of Nde1. Ablation of Nde1 by gene specific small interfering RNA causes mitotic delay and cell death, coupled with a modest decrease in the incidence of the cells that harbor excessive centrosomes. Collectively, our findings indicate that Nde1 can form a protein complex with Su48 in the centrosome and plays an important role for successful mitosis.

16638120|a|Protein acetylation is increasingly recognized as an important mechanism regulating a variety of cellular functions. Several human protein acetyltransferases have been characterized, most of them catalyzing epsilon-acetylation of histones and transcription factors. We recently described the human protein acetyltransferase hARD1 (human Arrest Defective 1). hARD1 interacts with NATH (N-Acetyl Transferase Human) forming a complex expressing protein N-terminal alpha-acetylation activity.

19153231|a|The Ebola virus (EBOV) VP35 protein antagonizes the early antiviral alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response. We previously demonstrated that VP35 inhibits the virus-induced activation of the IFN-beta promoter by blocking the phosphorylation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), a transcription factor that is crucial for the induction of IFN-alpha/beta expression. Furthermore, VP35 blocks IFN-beta promoter activation induced by any of several components of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA-5)-activated signaling pathways including RIG-I, IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK-1), and IkappaB kinase epsilon (IKKepsilon). These results suggested that VP35 may target the IRF kinases TBK-1 and IKKepsilon. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments now demonstrate physical interactions of VP35 with IKKepsilon and TBK-1, and the use of an IKKepsilon deletion construct further demonstrates that the amino-terminal kinase domain of IKKepsilon is sufficient for interactions with either IRF-3 or VP35. In vitro, either IKKepsilon or TBK-1 phosphorylates not only IRF-3 but also VP35. Moreover, VP35 overexpression impairs IKKepsilon-IRF-3, IKKepsilon-IRF-7, and IKKepsilon-IPS-1 interactions. Finally, lysates from cells overexpressing IKKepsilon contain kinase activity that can phosphorylate IRF-3 in vitro. When VP35 is expressed in the IKKepsilon-expressing cells, this kinase activity is suppressed. These data suggest that VP35 exerts its IFN-antagonist function, at least in part, by blocking necessary interactions between the kinases IKKepsilon and TBK-1 and their normal interaction partners, including their substrates, IRF-3 and IRF-7.

19188449|a|The NAD(+)-dependent histone deacetylase hSirT1 regulates cell survival and stress responses by inhibiting p53-, NF-kappaB-, and E2F1-dependent transcription. Here we show that the hSirT1/PCAF interaction controls the E2F1/p73 apoptotic pathway. hSirT1 represses E2F1-dependent P1p73 promoter activity in untreated cells and inhibits its activation in response to DNA damage. hSirT1, PCAF, and E2F1 are corecruited in vivo on theP1p73 promoter. hSirT1 deacetylates PCAF in vitro and modulates PCAF acetylation in vivo. In cells exposed to apoptotic DNA damage, nuclear NAD(+) levels decrease and inactivate hSirT1 without altering the hSirT1 interaction with PCAF and hSirT1 binding to the P1p73 promoter. The reactivation of hSirT1 by pyruvate that increases the [NAD(+)]/[NADH] ratio completely abolished the DNA damage-induced activation of TAp73 expression, thus linking the modulation of chromatin-bound hSirT1 deacetylase activity by the intracellular redox state with P1p73 promoter activity. The release of PCAF from hSirT1 repression favors the assembly of transcriptionally active PCAF/E2F1 complexes onto the P1p73 promoter and p53-independent apoptosis. Our results identify hSirT1 and PCAF as potential targets to modulate tumor cell survival and chemoresistance irrespective of p53 status.

19073181|a|Hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5A phosphoprotein is a component of virus replicase. Here we demonstrate that in vitro unphosphorylated NS5A protein inhibits HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) activity in polyA-oligoU system but has little effect on synthesis of viral RNA. The phosphorylated casein kinase (CK) II NS5A protein causes the opposite effect on RdRp in each of these systems. The phosphorylation of NS5A protein with CKII does not affect its affinity to the HCV RdRp and RNA. The NS5A phosphorylation with CKI does not change the RdRp activity. Herein we report evidence that the NS5A prevents template binding to the RdRp.

19180116|a|Autophagy, an evolutionarily conserved process, has functions both in cytoprotective and programmed cell death mechanisms. Beclin 1, an essential autophagic protein, was recently identified as a BH3-domain-only protein that binds to Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic family members. The dissociation of beclin 1 from its Bcl-2 inhibitors is essential for its autophagic activity, and therefore should be tightly controlled. Here, we show that death-associated protein kinase (DAPK) regulates this process. The activated form of DAPK triggers autophagy in a beclin-1-dependent manner. DAPK phosphorylates beclin 1 on Thr 119 located at a crucial position within its BH3 domain, and thus promotes the dissociation of beclin 1 from Bcl-XL and the induction of autophagy. These results reveal a substrate for DAPK that acts as one of the core proteins of the autophagic machinery, and they provide a new phosphorylation-based mechanism that reduces the interaction of beclin 1 with its inhibitors to activate the autophagic machinery.

19245811|a|eIF3f is a subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (eIF3). We previously showed that eIF3f is phosphorylated by cyclin dependent kinase 11 (CDK11(p46)) which is an important effector in apoptosis. Here, we identified a second eIF3f phosphorylation site (Thr119) by CDK11(p46) during apoptosis. We demonstrated that eIF3f is directly phosphorylated by CDK11(p46) in vivo. Phosphorylation of eIF3f plays an important role in regulating its function in translation and apoptosis. Phosphorylation of eIF3f enhances the association of eIF3f with the core eIF3 subunits during apoptosis. Our data suggested that eIF3f may inhibit translation by increasing the binding to the eIF3 complex during apoptosis.

19166854|a|Here we show that 14-3-3 proteins bind to Pim kinase-phosphorylated Ser166 and Ser186 on the human E3 ubiquitin ligase mouse double minute 2 (Mdm2), but not protein kinase B (PKB)/Akt-phosphorylated Ser166 and Ser188. Pim-mediated phosphorylation of Ser186 blocks phosphorylation of Ser188 by PKB, indicating potential interplay between the Pim and PKB signaling pathways in regulating Mdm2. In cells, expression of Pim kinases promoted phosphorylation of Ser166 and Ser186, interaction of Mdm2 with endogenous 14-3-3s and p14(ARF), and also increased the amount of Mdm2 protein by a mechanism that does not require Pim kinase activities. The implications of these findings for regulation of the p53 pathway, oncogenesis and drug discovery are discussed.

19101556|a|The mechanism underlying the protein-protein interaction of hnRNP K and PRMT family proteins is unclear. We examined and confirmed the arginine methylation of hnRNP K protein by PRMT1, not CARM1, via their direct binding. We also studied hnRNP K protein complexes containing CARM1, as well as PRMT1, using co-immunoprecipitation analysis. PRMT family proteins might be involved in the regulation of hnRNP K functions in nuclear receptor coactivator, transactivation, and p21 gene and protein expressions. We believe these observations will help provide insights into the regulation of hnRNP K protein functions via the recruitment of its associated proteins, including its arginine methylation-modifying proteins.

19061891|a|The kinetics of myosin regulatory light chain (MLC) phosphorylation by recombinant AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) were compared with commercial AMPK from rat liver and smooth muscle myosin light chain kinase (smMLCK). With identical amounts of activity units, initial rates of phosphorylation of MLC were at least 100-fold less with recombinant AMPK compared to smMLCK, whereas with rat liver AMPK significant phosphorylation was seen. In Madin-Darby Canine Kidney cells, AMPK activation led to an increase in MLC phosphorylation, which was decreased by a Rho kinase inhibitor without affecting AMPK activation. Therefore, MLC phosphorylation during energy deprivation does not result from direct phosphorylation by AMPK.

19060208|a|Tyrosine trans-phosphorylation is a key event in receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, yet, the structural basis for this process has eluded definition. Here, we present the crystal structure of the FGF receptor 2 kinases caught in the act of trans-phosphorylation of Y769, the major C-terminal phosphorylation site. The structure reveals that enzyme- and substrate-acting kinases engage each other through elaborate and specific interactions not only in the immediate vicinity of Y769 and the enzyme active site, but also in regions that are as much of 18 A away from D626, the catalytic base in the enzyme active site. These interactions lead to an unprecedented level of specificity and precision during the trans-phosphorylation on Y769. Time-resolved mass spectrometry analysis supports the observed mechanism of trans-phosphorylation. Our data provide a molecular framework for understanding the mechanism of action of Kallmann syndrome mutations and the order of trans-phosphorylation reactions in FGFRs. We propose that the salient mechanistic features of Y769 trans-phosphorylation are applicable to trans-phosphorylation of the equivalent major phosphorylation sites in many other RTKs.

19196987|a|Functional inactivation of p53 and constitutive activation of the NF-kappaB pathway has been associated with several human cancers. In this study, we show that IkappaB kinase 2 (IKK2/IKKbeta), which is critical for NF-kappaB activation, also phosphorylates p53. Phosphorylation of p53 at serines 362 and 366 by IKK2 leads to its recruitment to and ubiquitination by beta-TrCP1. Degradation of ubiquitinated p53 is independent of Mdm2, because it occurs in both wild-type and Mdm2(-/-) cells. SiRNA-mediated reduction in the levels of beta-TrCP1 and other members of the SCF(beta-TrCP1)E3 ubiquitin ligase complex or overexpression of a dominant negative form of beta-TrCP1 enhances p53 stability. Substitutions at Ser-362 and 366 of p53 by alanines (p53 AA) result in reduced phosphorylation of p53 by IKK2, decreased association with beta-TrCP1, and thus increased stability of p53 and expression of p53 target genes such as p21, altering the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Our results identify IKK2 and beta-TrCP1 as novel regulators of the p53 pathway and suggest that blocking of IKK2 and beta-TrCP1 could be a means of regulating p53 stability and thereby modulating its biological activity.

19234442|a|Life and death fate decisions allow cells to avoid massive apoptotic death in response to genotoxic stress. Although the regulatory mechanisms and signalling pathways controlling DNA repair and apoptosis are well characterized, the precise molecular strategies that determine the ultimate choice of DNA repair and survival or apoptotic cell death remain incompletely understood. Here we report that a protein tyrosine phosphatase, EYA, is involved in promoting efficient DNA repair rather than apoptosis in response to genotoxic stress in mammalian embryonic kidney cells by executing a damage-signal-dependent dephosphorylation of an H2AX carboxy-terminal tyrosine phosphate (Y142). This post-translational modification determines the relative recruitment of either DNA repair or pro-apoptotic factors to the tail of serine phosphorylated histone H2AX (gamma-H2AX) and allows it to function as an active determinant of repair/survival versus apoptotic responses to DNA damage, revealing an additional phosphorylation-dependent mechanism that modulates survival/apoptotic decisions during mammalian organogenesis.

19114660|a|PKC eta is expressed predominantly in the epithelial tissues; however, its role in the regulation of epithelial tight junctions (TJs) is unknown. We present evidence that PKC eta phosphorylates occludin on threonine residues (T403 and T404) and plays a crucial role in the assembly and/or maintenance of TJs in Caco-2 and MDCK cell monolayers. Inhibition of PKC eta by specific pseudo substrate inhibitor or knockdown of PKC eta by specific shRNA disrupts the junctional distribution of occludin and ZO-1 and compromises the epithelial barrier function. Expression of dominant negative, PKC eta(K394R) disrupts the TJ and barrier function, whereas wild-type PKC eta and constitutively active PKC eta(A161E) enhance the TJ integrity. Inhibition and knockdown of PKC eta or expression of PKC eta(K394R) induce dephosphorylation of occludin on threonine residues, whereas active PKC eta elevates occludin phosphorylation. PKC eta directly interacts with the C-terminal domain of occludin and phosphorylates it on highly conserved T403 and T404. T403/404A mutations result in the loss of occludin's ability to localize at the TJs, whereas T403/404D mutations attenuates the PKC eta inhibitor-mediated redistribution of occludin from the intercellular junctions. These results reveal an important mechanism of epithelial TJ regulation by PKC eta.

19198587|a|The AU-rich element (ARE)-mediated mRNA-degradation activity of the RNA binding K-homology splicing regulator protein (KSRP) is regulated by phosphorylation of a serine within its N-terminal KH domain (KH1). In the cell, phosphorylation promotes the interaction of KSRP and 14-3-3zeta protein and impairs the ability of KSRP to promote the degradation of its RNA targets. Here we examine the molecular details of this mechanism. We report that phosphorylation leads to the unfolding of the structurally atypical and unstable KH1, creating a site for 14-3-3zeta binding. Using this site, 14-3-3zeta discriminates between phosphorylated and unphosphorylated KH1, driving the nuclear localization of KSRP. 14-3-3zeta -KH1 interaction regulates the mRNA-decay activity of KSRP by sequestering the protein in a separate functional pool. This study demonstrates how an mRNA-degradation pathway is connected to extracellular signaling networks through the reversible unfolding of a protein domain.

19164531|a|Protein dynamics are inextricably linked to protein function but there are few techniques that allow protein dynamics to be conveniently interrogated. For example, mutations and translocations give rise to aberrant proteins such as Bcr-Abl where changes in protein conformation and dynamics are believed to result in deregulated kinase activity that provides the oncogenic signal in chronic myelogeous leukemia. Although crystal structures of the down-regulated c-Abl kinase core have been reported, the conformational impact of mutations that render Abl resistant to small-molecule kinase inhibitors are largely unknown as is the allosteric interplay of the various regulatory elements of the protein. Hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry (HX MS) was used to compare the conformations of wild-type Abl with a nonmyristoylated form and with 3 clinically relevant imatinib resistance mutants (T315I, Y253H and E255V). A HX-resistant core localized to the interface between the SH2 and kinase domains, a region known to be important for maintaining the down-regulated state. Conformational differences upon demyristoylation were consistent with the SH2 domain moving to the top of the small lobe of the kinase domain as a function of activation. There were conformational changes in the T315I mutant but, surprisingly, no major changes in conformation were detected in either the Y253H or the E255V mutants. Taken together, these results provide evidence that allosteric interactions and conformational changes play a major role in Abl kinase regulation in solution. Similar analyses could be performed on any protein to provide mechanistic details about conformational changes and protein function.

19162005|a|Proliferation of vascular endothelial cells (EC) and smooth muscle cells (SMC) is a critical event in angiogenesis and atherosclerosis. We previously showed that the C5b-9 assembly during complement activation induces cell cycle in human aortic EC (AEC) and SMC. C5b-9 can induce the expression of Response Gene to Complement (RGC)-32 and over expression of this gene leads to cell cycle activation. Therefore, the present study was carried out to test the requirement of endogenous RGC-32 for the cell cycle activation induced by C5b-9 by knocking-down its expression using siRNA. We identified two RGC-32 siRNAs that can markedly reduce the expression of RGC-32 mRNA in AEC. RGC-32 silencing in these cells abolished DNA synthesis induced by C5b-9 and serum growth factors, indicating the requirement of RGC-32 activity for S-phase entry. RGC-32 siRNA knockdown also significantly reduced the C5b-9 induced CDC2 activation and Akt phosphorylation. CDC2 does not play a role in G1/S transition in HeLa cells stably overexpressing RGC-32. RGC-32 was found to physically associate with Akt and was phosphorylated by Akt in vitro. Mutation of RGC-32 protein at Ser 45 and Ser 47 prevented Akt mediated phosphorylation. In addition, RGC-32 was found to regulate the release of growth factors from AEC. All these data together suggest that cell cycle induction by C5b-9 in AEC is RGC-32 dependent and this is in part through regulation of Akt and growth factor release.

19103756|a|Golgi fragmentation is a process that is necessary to allow its redistribution into daughter cells during mitosis, a process controlled by serine-threonine kinases. This Golgi fragmentation is activated by MEK1 and Plk3. Plk3 is a kinase that is a downstream target in the Golgi fragmentation pathway induced by MEK1 or by nocodazole. In this work, we have identified that Plk3 and VRK1 are two consecutive steps in this signaling pathway. Plk3 interacts with VRK1, forming a stable complex detected by reciprocal immunoprecipitations and pull-down assays; VRK1 colocalizes with giantin in the Golgi apparatus, as Plk3 also does, forming clearly detectable granules. VRK1 does not phosphorylate Plk3, but Plk3 phosphorylates the C-terminal region of VRK1 in Ser342. VRK1 with substitutions in S342 is catalytically active but blocks Golgi fragmentation, indicating that its specific phosphorylation is necessary for this process. The induction of Golgi fragmentation by MEK1 and Plk3 can be inhibited by kinase-dead VRK1, the knockdown of VRK1 by siVRK1, kinase-dead Plk3, or PD98059, a MEK1 inhibitor. The Plk3-VRK1 kinase module might represent two consecutive steps of a signaling cascade that participates in the regulation of Golgi fragmentation.

19155274|a|Short-patch repair of DNA single-strand breaks and gaps (SSB) is coordinated by XRCC1, a scaffold protein that recruits the DNA polymerase and DNA ligase required for filling and sealing the damaged strand. XRCC1 can also recruit end-processing enzymes, such as PNK (polynucleotide kinase 3'-phosphatase), Aprataxin and APLF (aprataxin/PNK-like factor), which ensure the availability of a free 3'-hydroxyl on one side of the gap, and a 5'-phosphate group on the other, for the polymerase and ligase reactions respectively. PNK binds to a phosphorylated segment of XRCC1 (between its two C-terminal BRCT domains) via its Forkhead-associated (FHA) domain. We show here, contrary to previous studies, that the FHA domain of PNK binds specifically, and with high affinity to a multiply phosphorylated motif in XRCC1 containing a pSer-pThr dipeptide, and forms a 2:1 PNK:XRCC1 complex. The high-resolution crystal structure of a PNK-FHA-XRCC1 phosphopeptide complex reveals the basis for this unusual bis-phosphopeptide recognition, which is probably a common feature of the known XRCC1-associating end-processing enzymes.

19167335|a|Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) play a critical role in regulating cellular functions by selectively dephosphorylating their substrates. Here we present 22 human PTP crystal structures that, together with prior structural knowledge, enable a comprehensive analysis of the classical PTP family. Despite their largely conserved fold, surface properties of PTPs are strikingly diverse. A potential secondary substrate-binding pocket is frequently found in phosphatases, and this has implications for both substrate recognition and development of selective inhibitors. Structural comparison identified four diverse catalytic loop (WPD) conformations and suggested a mechanism for loop closure. Enzymatic assays revealed vast differences in PTP catalytic activity and identified PTPD1, PTPD2, and HDPTP as catalytically inert protein phosphatases. We propose a "head-to-toe" dimerization model for RPTPgamma/zeta that is distinct from the "inhibitory wedge" model and that provides a molecular basis for inhibitory regulation. This phosphatome resource gives an expanded insight into intrafamily PTP diversity, catalytic activity, substrate recognition, and autoregulatory self-association.

23813973|a|LRRK2 G2019S mutation is the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). Cellular pathology caused by this mutant is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and augmented autophagy. However, the underlying mechanism is not known. In this study, we determined whether blocking excessive mitochondrial fission could reduce cellular damage and neurodegeneration induced by the G2019S mutation. In both LRRK2 G2019S-expressing cells and PD patient fibroblasts carrying this specific mutant, treatment with P110, a selective peptide inhibitor of fission dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) recently developed in our lab, reduced mitochondrial fragmentation and damage, and corrected excessive autophagy. LRRK2 G2019S directly bound to and phosphorylated Drp1 at Threonine595, whereas P110 treatment abolished this phosphorylation. A site-directed mutant, Drp1(T595A), corrected mitochondrial fragmentation, improved mitochondrial mass and suppressed excessive autophagy in both cells expressing LRRK2 G2019S and PD patient fibroblasts carrying the mutant. Further, in dopaminergic neurons derived from LRRK2 G2019S PD patient-induced pluripotent stem cells, we demonstrated that either P110 treatment or expression of Drp1(T595A) reduced mitochondrial impairment, lysosomal hyperactivity and neurite shortening. Together, we propose that inhibition of Drp1-mediated excessive mitochondrial fission might be a strategy for treatment of PD relevant to LRRK2 G2019S mutation. 

23973223|a|Regulatory T (Treg) cells suppress inflammatory immune responses and autoimmunity caused by self-reactive T cells. The key Treg cell transcription factor Foxp3 is downregulated during inflammation to allow for the acquisition of effector T cell-like functions. Here, we demonstrate that stress signals elicited by proinflammatory cytokines and lipopolysaccharides lead to the degradation of Foxp3 through the action of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Stub1. Stub1 interacted with Foxp3 to promote its K48-linked polyubiquitination in an Hsp70-dependent manner. Knockdown of endogenous Stub1 or Hsp70 prevented Foxp3 degradation. Furthermore, the overexpression of Stub1 in Treg cells abrogated their ability to suppress inflammatory immune responses in vitro and in vivo and conferred a T-helper-1-cell-like phenotype. Our results demonstrate the critical role of the stress-activated Stub1-Hsp70 complex in promoting Treg cell inactivation, thus providing a potential therapeutic target for the intervention against autoimmune disease, infection, and cancer. 

23764002|a|Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) initiates a signaling cascade that leads to DNA synthesis and cell proliferation, but its role in regulating DNA replication licensing is unclear. Here, we show that activated EGFR phosphorylates the p56 isoform of Lyn, p56(Lyn), at Y32, which then phosphorylates MCM7, a licensing factor critical for DNA replication, at Y600 to increase its association with other minichromosome maintenance complex proteins, thereby promoting DNA synthesis complex assembly and cell proliferation. Both p56(Lyn) Y32 and MCM7 Y600 phosphorylation are enhanced in proliferating cells and correlated with poor survival of breast cancer patients. These results establish a signaling cascade in which EGFR enhances MCM7 phosphorylation and DNA replication through Lyn phosphorylation in human cancer cells.

19557502|a|RIOK3 was initially characterized as a homolog of Aspergillus nidulans sudD and showed down-regulation at the invasive front of malignant melanomas, but the molecular mechanism remains elusive. Here, we report that overexpression of RIOK3 inhibits TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB activation, but down-regulation of endogenous RIOK3 expression by siRNA potentiates it. A yeast two-hybrid experiment revealed that RIOK3 interacted with caspase-10, and further, a GST pull-down assay and endogenous coimmunoprecipitation validated the interaction. We subsequently showed that the interaction was mediated by the RIO domain of RIOK3 and each death effector domain of caspase-10. Interestingly, our data demonstrated that RIOK3 suppressed caspase-10-mediated NF-kappaB activation by competing RIP1 and NIK to bind to caspase-10. Importantly, the kinase activity of RIOK3 was confirmed to be relevant to NF-kappaB signaling. Taken together, our findings strongly suggest that RIOK3 negatively regulates NF-kappaB signaling pathway activated by TNFalpha dependent on its kinase activity and NF-kappaB signaling pathway activated by caspase-10 independent of its kinase activity.

19556245|a|Transcription in eukaryotic genomes depends on enzymes that regulate the degree of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methylation. The mixed lineage leukemia protein-1 (MLL1) is a member of the SET1 family of H3K4 methyltransferases and is frequently rearranged in acute leukemias. Despite sequence comparisons that predict that SET1 family enzymes should only monomethylate their substrates, mono-, di-, and trimethylation of H3K4 has been attributed to SET1 family complexes in vivo and in vitro. To better understand this paradox, we have biochemically reconstituted and characterized a five-component 200-kDa MLL1 core complex containing human MLL1, WDR5, RbBP5, Ash2L, and DPY-30. We demonstrate that the isolated MLL1 SET domain is a slow monomethyltransferase and that tyrosine 3942 of MLL1 prevents di- and trimethylation of H3K4. In contrast, a complex containing the MLL1 SET domain, WDR5, RbBP5, Ash2L, and DPY-30, displays a marked approximately 600-fold increase in enzymatic activity but only to the dimethyl form of H3K4. Single turnover kinetic experiments reveal that the reaction leading to H3K4 dimethylation involves the transient accumulation of a monomethylated species, suggesting that the MLL1 core complex uses a non-processive mechanism to catalyze multiple lysine methylation. We have also discovered that the non-SET domain components of the MLL1 core complex possess a previously unrecognized methyltransferase activity that catalyzes H3K4 dimethylation within the MLL1 core complex. Our results suggest that the mechanism of multiple lysine methylation by the MLL1 core complex involves the sequential addition of two methyl groups at two distinct active sites within the complex.

19678838|a|Ephrin receptor tyrosine kinase A3 (EphA3, EC 2.7.10.1) is a member of a unique branch of the kinome in which downstream signaling occurs in both ligand- and receptor-expressing cells. Consequently, the ephrins and ephrin receptor tyrosine kinases often mediate processes involving cell-cell contact, including cellular adhesion or repulsion, developmental remodeling and neuronal mapping. The receptor is also frequently overexpressed in invasive cancers, including breast, small-cell lung and gastrointestinal cancers. However, little is known about direct substrates of EphA3 kinase and no chemical probes are available. Using a library approach, we found a short peptide sequence that is a good substrate for EphA3 and is suitable for co-crystallization studies. Complex structures show multiple contacts between kinase and substrates; in particular, two residues undergo conformational changes and by mutation are found to be important for substrate binding and turnover. In addition, a difference in catalytic efficiency between EPH kinase family members is observed. These results provide insight into the mechanism of substrate binding to these developmentally integral enzymes.

25517749|a|Genetic studies have established anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), a cell surface receptor tyrosine kinase, as a tractable molecular target in neuroblastoma. We describe comprehensive genomic, biochemical, and computational analyses of ALK mutations across 1,596 diagnostic neuroblastoma samples. ALK tyrosine kinase domain mutations occurred in 8% of samples--at three hot spots and 13 minor sites--and correlated significantly with poorer survival in high- and intermediate-risk neuroblastoma. Biochemical and computational studies distinguished oncogenic (constitutively activating) from nononcogenic mutations and allowed robust computational prediction of their effects. The mutated variants also showed differential in vitro crizotinib sensitivities. Our studies identify ALK genomic status as a clinically important therapeutic stratification tool in neuroblastoma and will allow tailoring of ALK-targeted therapy to specific mutations.

19135894|a|The assembly of the Smad complex is critical for TGFbeta signaling, yet the mechanisms that inactivate or empower nuclear Smad complexes are less understood. By means of siRNA screen we identified FAM (USP9x), a deubiquitinase acting as essential and evolutionarily conserved component in TGFbeta and bone morphogenetic protein signaling. Smad4 is monoubiquitinated in lysine 519 in vivo, a modification that inhibits Smad4 by impeding association with phospho-Smad2. FAM reverts this negative modification, re-empowering Smad4 function. FAM opposes the activity of Ectodermin/Tif1gamma (Ecto), a nuclear factor for which we now clarify a prominent role as Smad4 monoubiquitin ligase. Our study points to Smad4 monoubiquitination and deubiquitination as a way for cells to set their TGFbeta responsiveness: loss of FAM disables Smad4-dependent responses in several model systems, with Ecto being epistatic to FAM. This defines a regulative ubiquitination step controlling Smads that is parallel to those impinging on R-Smad phosphorylation.

19135240|a|Dysfunction and loss of insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells represent hallmarks of diabetes mellitus. Here, we show that mice lacking the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) p38delta display improved glucose tolerance due to enhanced insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells. Deletion of p38delta results in pronounced activation of protein kinase D (PKD), the latter of which we have identified as a pivotal regulator of stimulated insulin exocytosis. p38delta catalyzes an inhibitory phosphorylation of PKD1, thereby attenuating stimulated insulin secretion. In addition, p38delta null mice are protected against high-fat-feeding-induced insulin resistance and oxidative stress-mediated beta cell failure. Inhibition of PKD1 reverses enhanced insulin secretion from p38delta-deficient islets and glucose tolerance in p38delta null mice as well as their susceptibility to oxidative stress. In conclusion, the p38delta-PKD pathway integrates regulation of the insulin secretory capacity and survival of pancreatic beta cells, pointing to a pivotal role for this pathway in the development of overt diabetes mellitus.

27001024|a|Src family tyrosine kinases (SFKs) are critical players in normal and aberrant biological processes. While phosphorylation importantly regulates SFKs at two known tyrosines, large-scale phosphoproteomics have revealed four additional tyrosines commonly phosphorylated in SFKs. We found these novel tyrosines to be autophosphorylation sites. Mimicking phosphorylation at the C-terminal site to the activation loop decreased Fyn activity. Phosphomimetics and direct phosphorylation at the three SH2 domain sites increased Fyn activity while reducing phosphotyrosine-dependent interactions. While 68% of human SH2 domains exhibit conservation of at least one of these tyrosines, few have been found phosphorylated except when found in cis to a kinase domain.

27066749|a|SMYD3 is a lysine methyltransferase overexpressed in colorectal, breast, prostate, and hepatocellular tumors, and has been implicated as an oncogene in human malignancies. Methylation of MEKK2 by SMYD3 is important for regulation of the MEK/ERK pathway, suggesting the possibility of selectively targeting SMYD3 in RAS-driven cancers. Structural and kinetic characterization of SMYD3 was undertaken leading to a co-crystal structure of SMYD3 with a MEKK2-peptide substrate bound, and the observation that SMYD3 follows a partially processive mechanism. These insights allowed for the design of GSK2807, a potent and selective, SAM-competitive inhibitor of SMYD3 (Ki = 14 nM). A high-resolution crystal structure reveals that GSK2807 bridges the gap between the SAM-binding pocket and the substrate lysine tunnel of SMYD3. Taken together, our data demonstrate that small-molecule inhibitors of SMYD3 can be designed to prevent methylation of MEKK2 and these could have potential use as anticancer therapeutics.

27088854|a|Dietary fructose is primarily metabolized in the liver. Here we demonstrate that, compared with normal hepatocytes, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells markedly reduce the rate of fructose metabolism and the level of reactive oxygen species, as a result of a c-Myc-dependent and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) H1- and H2-mediated switch from expression of the high-activity fructokinase (KHK)-C to the low-activity KHK-A isoform. Importantly, KHK-A acts as a protein kinase, phosphorylating and activating phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1 (PRPS1) to promote pentose phosphate pathway-dependent de novo nucleic acid synthesis and HCC formation. Furthermore, c-Myc, hnRNPH1/2 and KHK-A expression levels and PRPS1 Thr225 phosphorylation levels correlate with each other in HCC specimens and are associated with poor prognosis for HCC. These findings reveal a pivotal mechanism underlying the distinct fructose metabolism between HCC cells and normal hepatocytes and highlight the instrumental role of KHK-A protein kinase activity in promoting de novo nucleic acid synthesis and HCC development.

26977885|a|We report that the protein kinase Cι (PKCι) oncogene controls expression of NOTCH3, a key driver of stemness, in KRAS-mediated lung adenocarcinoma (LADC). PKCι activates NOTCH3 expression by phosphorylating the ELF3 transcription factor and driving ELF3 occupancy on the NOTCH3 promoter. PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling controls the tumor-initiating cell phenotype by regulating asymmetric cell division, a process necessary for tumor initiation and maintenance. Primary LADC tumors exhibit PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling, and combined pharmacologic blockade of PKCι and NOTCH synergistically inhibits tumorigenic behavior in vitro and LADC growth in vivo demonstrating the therapeutic potential of PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signal inhibition to more effectively treat KRAS LADC.

17126281|a|Zipper-interacting protein kinase (ZIP kinase) has been thought to be involved in apoptosis and the C-terminal leucine zipper motif is important for its function. Recent studies have revealed that ZIP kinase also plays a role in regulating myosin phosphorylation. Here, we found novel ZIP kinase isoform in which the C-terminal non-kinase domain containing a leucine zipper is eliminated (hZIPK-S). hZIPK-S binds to myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1(MYPT1) similar to the long isoform (hZIPK-L). In addition, we found that hZIPK-S as well as hZIPK-L bind to myosin. These results indicate that a leucine zipper is not critical for the binding of ZIP kinase to MYPT1 and myosin. Consistently, hZIPK-S localized with stress-fibers where they co-localized with myosin. The residues 278-311, the C-terminal side of the kinase domain common to the both isoforms, is involved in the binding to MYPT1, while the myosin binding domain is within the kinase domain. These results suggest that the newly found hZIPK-S as well as the long isoform play an important role in the regulation of myosin phosphorylation.

19674106|a|SR protein kinases (SRPKs) phosphorylate Ser/Arg dipeptide-containing proteins that play crucial roles in a broad spectrum of basic cellular processes. Phosphorylation by SRPKs constitutes a major way of regulating such cellular mechanisms. In the past, we have shown that SRPK1a interacts with the nuclear matrix protein scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) via its unique N-terminal domain, which differentiates it from SRPK1. In this study, we show that SAFB1 inhibits the activity of both SRPK1a and SRPK1 in vitro and that its RE-rich region is redundant for the observed inhibition. We demonstrate that kinase activity inhibition is caused by direct binding of SAFB1 to SRPK1a and SRPK1, and we also present evidence for the in vitro binding of SAFB2 to the two kinases, albeit with different affinity. Moreover, we show that both SR protein kinases can form complexes with both scaffold attachment factors B in living cells and that this interaction is capable of inhibiting their activity, depending on the tenacity of the complex formed. Finally, we present data demonstrating that SRPK/SAFB complexes are present in the nucleus of HeLa cells and that the enzymatic activity of the nuclear matrixlocalized SRPK1 is repressed. These results suggest a new role for SAFB proteins as regulators of SRPK activity and underline the importance of the assembly of transient intranuclear complexes in cellular regulation.

17255944|a|Early Drosophila development requires two receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) pathways: the Torso and the Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathways, which regulate terminal and dorsal-ventral patterning, respectively. Previous studies have shown that these pathways, either directly or indirectly, lead to post-transcriptional downregulation of the Capicua repressor in the early embryo and in the ovary. Here, we show that both regulatory effects are direct and depend on a MAPK docking site in Capicua that physically interacts with the MAPK Rolled. Capicua derivatives lacking this docking site cause dominant phenotypes similar to those resulting from loss of Torso and EGFR activities. Such phenotypes arise from inappropriate repression of genes normally expressed in response to Torso and EGFR signaling. Our results are consistent with a model whereby Capicua is the main nuclear effector of the Torso pathway, but only one of different effectors responding to EGFR signaling. Finally, we describe differences in the modes of Capicua downregulation by Torso and EGFR signaling, raising the possibility that such differences contribute to the tissue specificity of both signals.

17290288|a|The interferon (IFN)-inducible, double-stranded RNA activated protein kinase (PKR) is a dual-specificity kinase, which has an essential role in the regulation of protein synthesis by phosphorylating the translation eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2). Here, we show the tyrosine (Tyr) phosphorylation of PKR in response to type I or type II IFNs. We show that PKR physically interacts with either Jak1 or Tyk2 in unstimulated cells and that these interactions are increased in IFN-treated cells. We also show that PKR acts as a substrate of activated Jaks, and is phosphorylated at Tyr 101 and Tyr 293 both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, we provide strong evidence that both the induction of eIF2alpha phosphorylation and inhibition of protein synthesis by IFN are impaired in cells lacking Jak1 or Tyk2, which corresponds to a lack of induction of PKR tyrosine phosphorylation. We conclude that PKR tyrosine phosphorylation provides an important link between IFN signalling and translational control through the regulation of eIF2alpha phosphorylation.

17141222|a|Regulation of growth factor dependent cell survival is crucial for development and disease progression. Here, we report a novel function of Src kinases as a negative regulator of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) dependent cell survival. We characterized a series of PDGF alpha receptor (PDGFRA) mutants, which lack the binding sites for Src, phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K), SHP-2 or phospholipase C-gamma. We found that PDGFRA-dependent cell survival was mainly mediated through activation of PI3K, and was negatively regulated by Src. Characterization of the downstream signaling events revealed that PI3K activates the protein kinase Akt, which in turn phosphorylates and thus inactivates proapoptotic Forkhead transcription factors. Src phosphorylates the ubiquitin-ligase c-Cbl, which is required for degradation of the activated receptor. Consequently, overexpression of c-Cbl prevented PDGFRA-mediated cell survival, whereas it did not affect this response, when Src was unable to associate with the receptor. This novel function of Src in antiapoptotic signaling introduces Src kinases as an interesting therapeutic target in apoptosis related diseases.

17064692|a|The canonical mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal cascade was previously suggested to be atypical in the malaria parasite. This raises queries on the existence of alternative mediators of plasmodial MAPK pathways. This study describes, Pfnek3, a malarial protein kinase belonging to the NIMA (Never in Mitosis, Aspergillus) family. Endogenous Pfnek3 is expressed during late asexual to gametocyte stages and lacks some classical protein kinase sequence motifs. Moreover, Pfnek3 is phylogenetically distant from mammalian NIMA-kinases. Recombinant Pfnek3 was able to phosphorylate and stimulate a malarial MAPK (Pfmap2). Contrastingly, this was not observed with two other kinases, Pfmap1 and human MAPK1, suggesting that the Pfnek3-Pfmap2 interaction may be specific for Pfmap2 regulation. In summary, our data reveal a malarial NIMA-kinase with the potential to regulate a MAPK. Possessing biochemical properties divergent from classical mammalian NIMA-kinases, Pfnek3 could potentially be an attractive target for parasite-selective anti-malarials.

19564905|a|The regulation of filopodia plays a crucial role during neuronal development and synaptogenesis. Axonal filopodia, which are known to originate presynaptic specializations, are regulated in response to neurotrophic factors. The structural components of filopodia are actin filaments, whose dynamics and organization are controlled by ensembles of actin-binding proteins. How neurotrophic factors regulate these latter proteins remains, however, poorly defined. Here, using a combination of mouse genetic, biochemical, and cell biological assays, we show that genetic removal of Eps8, an actin-binding and regulatory protein enriched in the growth cones and developing processes of neurons, significantly augments the number and density of vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP)-dependent axonal filopodia. The reintroduction of Eps8 wild type (WT), but not an Eps8 capping-defective mutant, into primary hippocampal neurons restored axonal filopodia to WT levels. We further show that the actin barbed-end capping activity of Eps8 is inhibited by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) treatment through MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of Eps8 residues S624 and T628. Additionally, an Eps8 mutant, impaired in the MAPK target sites (S624A/T628A), displays increased association to actin-rich structures, is resistant to BDNF-mediated release from microfilaments, and inhibits BDNF-induced filopodia. The opposite is observed for a phosphomimetic Eps8 (S624E/T628E) mutant. Thus, collectively, our data identify Eps8 as a critical capping protein in the regulation of axonal filopodia and delineate a molecular pathway by which BDNF, through MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of Eps8, stimulates axonal filopodia formation, a process with crucial impacts on neuronal development and synapse formation.

17197020|a|In HEK293 cells, transfected with the Ca2+ channel protein TRPV6, Ca2+ influx is increased and TRPV6 is tyrosine phosphorylated following addition of the tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor N,N-dimethyl-hydroxamido hydroxovanadate to cells. This effect of DMHV is enhanced by co-transfection of cells with the tyrosine kinase Src and the tyrosine phosphatase 1B. It is abolished when cells had been treated with PP1, an inhibitor of Src family tyrosine kinases. PTP1B interacts with the N-terminal domain of TRPV6 within a region of amino acids 1-191 as shown by co-immunoprecipitation, bimolecular fluorescence complementation and the yeast 2-hybrid system. Point mutation of both tyrosines 161 and 162 in the TRPV6 protein abolishes the DMHV-effect on Ca2+ influx and tyrosine phosphorylation by Src. Single mutations of Y161 or Y162 shows that each of both tyrosines alone is sufficient for the DMHV-effect. We conclude that phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of tyrosines in position 161 and 162 is essential for regulation of Ca2+ influx through TRPV6 Ca2+ channels in HEK293 cells.

17128263|a|Growth hormone binds to its membrane receptor (GHR), whereby it regulates many cellular functions, including proliferation, differentiation and chemotaxis. However, although the activation of growth hormone-mediated signalling is well understood, the precise mechanism responsible for its regulation has not been elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that phospholipase Cgamma1 (PLCgamma1) modulates the action of growth hormone-mediated signalling by interacting with tyrosine kinase Jak2 (janus kinase 2) in a growth hormone-dependent manner. In the absence of PLCgamma1 (PLCgamma1(-/-)), growth hormone-induced JAK2 and STAT5 phosphorylation significantly increased in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Furthermore, the re-expression of PLCgamma1 reduced growth hormone-induced Jak2 activation. Growth hormone-induced Jak2 phosphorylation was enhanced by siRNA-specific knockdown of PLCgamma1. Interestingly, PLCgamma1 physically linked Jak2 and protein tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP-1B) by binding to both using different domains, and this process was implicated in the modulation of cytokine signalling through Jak2. In addition, in PLCgamma1(-/-) MEFs, growth hormone-dependent c-Fos activation was upregulated and growth hormone-induced proliferation was potentiated. These results suggest that PLCgamma1 has a key function in the regulation of growth hormone-mediated signalling by negatively regulating Jak2 activation.

17135270|a|Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP-1B) has been implicated in the regulation of the insulin receptor. Dephosphorylation of the insulin receptor results in decreased insulin signaling and thus decreased glucose uptake. PTP-1B-/- mice have increased insulin sensitivity and are resistant to weight gain when fed a high fat diet, validating PTP-1B as a potential target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Many groups throughout the world have been searching for selective inhibitors for PTP-1B, and most of them target inhibitors to PTP-1B-(1-298), the N-terminal catalytic domain of the enzyme. However, the C-terminal domain is quite large and could influence the activity of the enzyme. Using two constructs of PTP-1B and a phosphopeptide as substrate, steady state assays showed that the presence of the C-terminal domain decreased both the Km and the k(cat) 2-fold. Pre-steady state kinetic experiments showed that the presence of the C-terminal domain improved the affinity of the enzyme for a phosphopeptide 2-fold, primarily because the off-rate was slower. This suggests that the C-terminal domain of PTP-1B may contact the phosphopeptide in some manner, allowing it to remain at the active site longer. This could be useful when screening libraries of compounds for inhibitors of PTP-1B. A compound that is able to make contacts with the C-terminal domain of PTP-1B would not only have a modest improvement in affinity but may also provide for specificity over other phosphatases.

17203073|a|In Drosophila, the partition defective (Par) complex containing Par3, Par6 and atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) directs the polarized distribution and unequal segregation of the cell fate determinant Numb during asymmetric cell divisions. Unequal segregation of mammalian Numb has also been observed, but the factors involved are unknown. Here, we identify in vivo phosphorylation sites of mammalian Numb and show that both mammalian and Drosophila Numb interact with, and are substrates for aPKC in vitro. A form of mammalian Numb lacking two protein kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation sites (Numb2A) accumulates at the cell membrane and is refractory to PKC activation. In epithelial cells, mammalian Numb localizes to the basolateral membrane and is excluded from the apical domain, which accumulates aPKC. In contrast, Numb2A is distributed uniformly around the cell cortex. Mutational analysis of conserved aPKC phosphorylation sites in Drosophila Numb suggests that phosphorylation contributes to asymmetric localization of Numb, opposite to aPKC in dividing sensory organ precursor cells. These results suggest a model in which phosphorylation of Numb by aPKC regulates its polarized distribution in epithelial cells as well as during asymmetric cell divisions.

17069809|a|We investigated parabutoporin (PP), an antimicrobial scorpion peptide, to understand its inhibition on NADPH oxidase in human PMN. We show that PP is a good substrate for all PKC-isotypes, implicated in the activation of NADPH oxidase, and acts as a potent competitive inhibitor of in vitro p47(phox)-phosphorylation by PKC-alpha, -betaI, -betaII and -delta, but not PKC-zeta. In PMN, PP also inhibits the PMA-stimulated phosphorylation of p47(phox) and its subsequent translocation. In contrast, PP affects the PKC-independent activation to a much lesser degree. This indicates that PP inhibits the activation of NADPH oxidase at submicromolar concentrations in a strongly PKC-dependent manner.

17078951|a|Phosphorylation of tau protein is regulated by several kinases, especially glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta), cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 (cdk5) and cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). Phosphorylation of tau by PKA primes it for phosphorylation by GSK-3beta, but the site-specific modulation of GSK-3beta-catalyzed tau phosphorylation by the prephosphorylation has not been well investigated. Here, we found that prephosphorylation by PKA promotes GSK-3beta-catalyzed tau phosphorylation at Thr181, Ser199, Ser202, Thr205, Thr217, Thr231, Ser396 and Ser422, but inhibits its phosphorylation at Thr212 and Ser404. In contrast, the prephosphorylation had no significant effect on its subsequent phosphorylation by cdk5 at Thr181, Ser199, Thr205, Thr231 and Ser422; inhibited it at Ser202, Thr212, Thr217 and Ser404; and slightly promoted it at Ser396. These studies reveal the nature of the inter-regulation of tau phosphorylation by the three major tau kinases.

19666608|a|NF-kappaB is critical in innate immune defense responses against invading microbial pathogens. Legionella pneumophila infection of lung macrophages causes Legionnaire's disease with pneumonia symptoms. A set of NF-kappaB-controlled genes involved in inflammation and anti-apoptosis are up-regulated in macrophages upon L. pneumophila infection in a Legionella Dot/Icm type IV secretion system-dependent manner. Among approximately 100 Dot/Icm substrates screened, we identified LegK1 as the sole Legionella protein that harbors a highly potent NF-kappaB-stimulating activity. LegK1 does not affect MAPK and IFN pathways. Activation of the NF-kappaB pathway by LegK1 requires its eukaryotic-like Ser/Thr kinase activity and is independent of upstream components in the NF-kappaB pathway, including TRAFs, NIK, MEKK3, and TAK1. Cell-free reconstitution revealed that LegK1 stimulated NF-kappaB activation in the absence of IKKalpha and IKKbeta, and LegK1 efficiently phosphorylated IkappaBalpha on Ser-32 and Ser-36 both in vitro and in cells. LegK1 seems to mimic the host IKK as LegK1 also directly phosphorylated other IkappaB family of inhibitors including p100 in the noncanonical NF-kappaB pathway. Phosphorylation of p100 by LegK1 led to its maturation into p52. Thus, LegK1 is a bacterial effector that directly activates the host NF-kappaB signaling and likely plays important roles in modulating macrophage defense or inflammatory responses during L. pneumophila infection.

17174311|a|The family of polo like kinases (Plks) regulate cell cycle progression through key functional roles in mitosis. While the four mammalian family members, Plk1-4, share overlapping functions, each member possesses unique functions that may be dictated in part by their ability to phosphorylate different substrates. Numerous cellular substrates for Plk1, 2, and 3 have been characterized, but the protein targets for Plk4/Sak remain unknown. We have purified the kinase domain of Sak and demonstrated that it has robust kinase activity in vitro. Using in vitro kinase assays on peptide spots arrays, we determined the consensus phosphorylation motif for Sak to be yen-[Ile/Leu/Val]-Ser/Thr-phi-phi-X- yen/Pro (where phi denotes a large hydrophobic residue, yen is a charged residue dependent on the context of the surrounding sequence, and residues in brackets are unfavoured). This consensus phosphorylation motif differs from that of Plk1, and provides a basis for future studies to identify in vivo substrates of Sak.

17053781|a|Receptor interacting protein 140 (RIP140), a ligand-dependent corepressor for nuclear receptors, can be modified by arginine methylation. Three methylated arginine residues, at Arg-240, Arg-650, and Arg-948, were identified by mass spectrometric analysis. Site-directed mutagenesis studies demonstrated the functionality of these arginine residues. The biological activity of RIP140 was suppressed by protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) due to RIP140 methylation, which reduced the recruitment of histone deacetylases to RIP140 and facilitated its nuclear export by enhancing interaction with exportin 1. A constitutive negative (Arg/Ala) mutant of RIP140 was resistant to the effect of PRMT1, and a constitutive positive (Arg/Phe) mutation mimicked the effect of arginine methylation. The biological activities of the wild type and the mutant proteins were examined in RIP140-null MEF cells. This study uncovered a novel means to inactivate, or suppress, RIP140, and demonstrated protein arginine methylation as a critical type of modification for corepressor.

17170700|a|G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) mostly signal through heterotrimeric G proteins. Increasing evidence suggests that GPCRs could function in a G-protein-independent manner. Here, we show that at low concentrations of an agonist, beta(2)-adrenergic receptors (beta(2)-ARs) signal through Galpha(s) to activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway in mouse embryonic fibroblast cells. At high agonist concentrations, signals are also transduced through beta(2)-ARs via an additional pathway that is G-protein-independent but tyrosine kinase Src-dependent. This new dosage-dependent switch of signaling modes of GPCRs has significant implications for GPCR intrinsic properties and desensitization.

17079228|a|TAK1 (transforming growth factor beta-activated kinase 1) is a serine/threonine kinase that is a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase and an essential intracellular signaling component in inflammatory signaling pathways. Upon stimulation of cells with inflammatory cytokines, TAK1 binds proteins that stimulate autophosphorylation within its activation loop and is thereby catalytically activated. This activation is transient; it peaks within a couple of minutes and is subsequently down-regulated rapidly to basal levels. The mechanism of down-regulation of TAK1 has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we found that toxin inhibition of type 2A protein phosphatases greatly enhances interleukin 1 (IL-1)-dependent phosphorylation of Thr-187 in the TAK1 activation loop as well as the catalytic activity of TAK1. From proteomic analysis of TAK1-binding proteins, we identified protein phosphatase 6 (PP6), a type-2A phosphatase, and demonstrated that PP6 associated with and inactivated TAK1 by dephosphorylation of Thr-187. Ectopic and endogenous PP6 co-precipitated with TAK1, and expression of PP6 reduced IL-1 activation of TAK1 but did not affect osmotic activation of MLK3, another MAPKKK. Reduction of PP6 expression by small interfering RNA enhances IL-1-induced phosphorylation of Thr-187 in TAK1. Enhancement occurred without change in levels of PP2A showing specificity for PP6. Our results demonstrate that PP6 specifically down-regulates TAK1 through dephosphorylation of Thr-187 in the activation loop, which is likely important for suppressing inflammatory responses via TAK1 signaling pathways.

17097642|a|The Raf kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP) binds to Raf-1 interfering with binding of the MEK substrate and potentially also Raf-1 activation. In response to mitogen stimulation RKIP dissociates from Raf-1 and later re-associates. Here, using a combination of mutational approaches, biochemical studies, peptide arrays and plasmon surface resonance (BIAcore), we fine map and characterize a minimal 24 amino acid long RKIP binding domain in the Raf-1 N-region, which consists of constitutive elements at both flanks and a center element that is regulated by phosphorylation and enhances the re-binding of RKIP to Raf-1 in the later phase of mitogen stimulation.

17053785|a|The conserved polarity complex, comprising the partitioning-defective (Par) proteins Par3 and Par6, and the atypical protein kinase C, functions in various cell-polarization events and asymmetric cell divisions. However, little is known about whether and how external stimuli-induced signals may regulate Par3 function in epithelial cell polarity. Here, we found that Par3 was tyrosine phosphorylated through phosphoproteomic profiling of pervanadate-induced phosphotyrosine proteins. We also demonstrated that the tyrosine phosphorylation event induced by multiple growth factors including epidermal growth factor (EGF) was dependent on activation of Src family kinase (SFK) members c-Src and c-Yes. The tyrosine residue 1127 (Y1127) of Par3 was identified as the major EGF-induced phosphorylation site. Moreover, we found that Y1127 phosphorylation reduced the association of Par3 with LIM kinase 2 (LIMK2), thus enabling LIMK2 to regulate cofilin phosphorylation dynamics. Substitution of Y1127 for phenylalanine impaired the EGF-induced Par3 and LIMK2 dissociation and delayed epithelial tight junction (TJ) assembly considerably. Collectively, these data suggest a novel, phosphotyrosine-dependent fine-tuning mechanism of Par3 in epithelial TJ assembly controlled by the EGF receptor-SFK signaling pathway.

17101137|a|In this study we identified snapin as an interaction partner of the CK1 isoform delta (CK1delta) in the yeast two-hybrid system and localized the interacting domains of both proteins. The interaction of CK1delta with snapin was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. Snapin was phosphorylated by CK1delta in vitro. Both proteins localized in close proximity in the perinuclear region, wherein snapin was found to associate with membranes of the Golgi apparatus. The identification of snapin as a new substrate of CK1delta points towards a possible function for CK1delta in modulating snapin specific functions.

19549727|a|In eukaryotic cells the stability and function of many proteins are regulated by the addition of ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like peptides. This process is dependent upon the sequential action of an E1-activating enzyme, an E2-conjugating enzyme, and an E3 ligase. Different combinations of these proteins confer substrate specificity and the form of protein modification. However, combinatorial preferences within ubiquitination networks remain unclear. In this study, yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screens were combined with true homology modeling methods to generate a high-density map of human E2/E3-RING interactions. These data include 535 experimentally defined novel E2/E3-RING interactions and >1300 E2/E3-RING pairs with more favorable predicted free-energy values than the canonical UBE2L3-CBL complex. The significance of Y2H predictions was assessed by both mutagenesis and functional assays. Significantly, 74/80 (>92%) of Y2H predicted complexes were disrupted by point mutations that inhibit verified E2/E3-RING interactions, and a approximately 93% correlation was observed between Y2H data and the functional activity of E2/E3-RING complexes in vitro. Analysis of the high-density human E2/E3-RING network reveals complex combinatorial interactions and a strong potential for functional redundancy, especially within E2 families that have undergone evolutionary expansion. Finally, a one-step extended human E2/E3-RING network, containing 2644 proteins and 5087 edges, was assembled to provide a resource for future functional investigations.

17110931|a|Organisms rely heavily on protein phosphorylation to transduce intracellular signals. The phosphorylation of a protein often induces conformational changes, which are responsible for triggering downstream cellular events. Protein kinases are themselves frequently regulated by phosphorylation. Recently, we and others proposed the molecular mechanism by which phosphorylation at a hydrophobic motif (HM) regulates the conformation and activity of many members of the AGC group of protein kinases. Here we have developed specific, low molecular weight compounds, which target the HM/PIF-pocket and have the ability to allosterically activate phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) by modulating the phosphorylation-dependent conformational transition. The mechanism of action of these compounds was characterized by mutagenesis of PDK1, synthesis of compound analogs, interaction-displacement studies and isothermal titration calorimetry experiments. Our results raise the possibility of developing drugs that target the AGC kinases via a novel mode of action and may inspire future rational development of compounds with the ability to modulate phosphorylation-dependent conformational transitions in other proteins.

17318191|a|Self-renewal of Bcr-Abl(+) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells is sustained by a nuclear activated serine/threonine-(S/T) unphosphorylated beta-catenin. Although beta-catenin can be tyrosine (Y)-phosphorylated, the occurrence and biological relevance of this covalent modification in Bcr-Abl-associated leukemogenesis is unknown. Here we show that Bcr-Abl levels control the degree of beta-catenin protein stabilization by affecting its Y/S/T-phospho content in CML cells. Bcr-Abl physically interacts with beta-catenin, and its oncogenic tyrosine kinase activity is required to phosphorylate beta-catenin at Y86 and Y654 residues. This Y-phospho beta-catenin binds to the TCF4 transcription factor, thus representing a transcriptionally active pool. Imatinib, a Bcr-Abl antagonist, impairs the beta-catenin/TCF-related transcription causing a rapid cytosolic retention of Y-unphosphorylated beta-catenin, which presents an increased binding affinity for the Axin/GSK3beta complex. Although Bcr-Abl does not affect GSK3beta autophosphorylation, it prevents, through its effect on beta-catenin Y phosphorylation, Axin/GSK3beta binding to beta-catenin and its subsequent S/T phosphorylation. Silencing of beta-catenin by small interfering RNA inhibited proliferation and clonogenicity of Bcr-Abl(+) CML cells, in synergism with Imatinib. These findings indicate the Bcr-Abl triggered Y phosphorylation of beta-catenin as a new mechanism responsible for its protein stabilization and nuclear signalling activation in CML.

17116858|a|To overcome host defenses, bacterial pathogens of the genus Yersinia inject specific effector proteins into colonized mammalian cells. One such virulence factor, YopJ, inhibits the host inflammatory response and induces apoptosis of immune cells by blocking multiple signaling pathways, including the MAPK and NF-kappaB pathways. In this study, we show that YopJ exerts its deleterious effects by catalyzing the acetylation of two serine residues in the activation loop of the MAP kinase kinase, MEK2. This covalent modification prevents the phosphorylation of these serine residues that is required for activation of MEK2 and downstream signal propagation. We also show that YopJ causes acetylation of a threonine residue in the activation loop of both the alpha and beta subunits of the NF-kappaB pathway kinase, IKK. These results establish a hitherto uncharacterized mode of action for bacterial toxins and suggest the possibility that serine/threonine acetylation may occur even under nonpathogenic conditions and may be a widespread protein modification regulating protein function in eukaryotic cells.

17108971|a|Specific sites of lysine methylation on histones correlate with either activation or repression of transcription. The tumour suppressor p53 (refs 4-7) is one of only a few non-histone proteins known to be regulated by lysine methylation. Here we report a lysine methyltransferase, Smyd2, that methylates a previously unidentified site, Lys 370, in p53. This methylation site, in contrast to the known site Lys 372, is repressing to p53-mediated transcriptional regulation. Smyd2 helps to maintain low concentrations of promoter-associated p53. We show that reducing Smyd2 concentrations by short interfering RNA enhances p53-mediated apoptosis. We find that Set9-mediated methylation of Lys 372 inhibits Smyd2-mediated methylation of Lys 370, providing regulatory cross-talk between post-translational modifications. In addition, we show that the inhibitory effect of Lys 372 methylation on Lys 370 methylation is caused, in part, by blocking the interaction between p53 and Smyd2. Thus, similar to histones, p53 is subject to both activating and repressing lysine methylation. Our results also predict that Smyd2 may function as a putative oncogene by methylating p53 and repressing its tumour suppressive function.

17301242|a|Preadipocyte differentiation in culture is driven by an insulin and cAMP dependant transcriptional cascade which induces the bzip transcription factors C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta. We have previously shown that glucocorticoid treatment, which strongly potentiates this differentiation pathway, stimulates the titration of the corepressor histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) from C/EBPbeta. This results in a dramatic enhancement of C/EBPbeta-dependent transcription from the C/EBPalpha promoter, concomitant with potentiation of preadipocyte differentiation. Here, we show that C/EBPbeta is acetylated by GCN5 and PCAF within a cluster of lysine residues between amino acids 98-102 and that this acetylation is strongly induced by glucocorticoid treatment. Arginine substitution of the lysine residues within the acetylation motif of C/EBPbeta prevented acetylation and blocked the ability of glucocorticoids to enhance C/EBPbeta-directed transcription and to potentiate C/EBPbeta-dependent preadipocyte differentiation. Moreover, acetylation of C/EBPbeta appeared to directly interfere with the interaction of HDAC1 with C/EBPbeta, suggesting that PCAF/GCN5-dependent acetylation of C/EBPbeta serves as an important molecular switch in determining the transcriptional regulatory potential of this transcription factor.

17284590|a|RNA-binding motif protein 4 (RBM4) plays a regulatory role in alternative splicing of precursor mRNA. We show here that cell stress such as arsenite exposure induces phosphorylation of RBM4 at serine 309 and also drives its cytoplasmic accumulation and targeting to stress granule via the MKK(3/6)-p38 signaling pathway. Accordingly, RBM4 suppresses cap-dependent translation in a cis-element-dependent manner. However, RBM4 concomitantly activates internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-mediated translation likely by promoting the association of translation initiation factor eIF4A with IRES-containing mRNAs. Overexpression of RBM4 therefore mimics the effect of cell stress-induced signaling on translation initiation control. Whereas arsenite treatment promotes RBM4 loading onto IRES mRNAs and enhances RBM4-eIF4A interactions, a nonphosphorylatable mutant of RBM4 was unresponsive to arsenite stress and failed to activate IRES-mediated translation. Thus, our results uncover a previously unrecognized paradigm for the RNA-binding protein RBM4 in its phosphorylation-modulated dual action as a suppressor of cap-dependent and enhancer of IRES-mediated translation in response to stress signals.

17159996|a|Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is an ubiquitously expressed enzyme that negatively regulates growth-factor signalling and cell proliferation by binding to and dephosphorylating key receptor tyrosine kinases, such as the insulin receptor. It is unclear how the activity of PTP1B is regulated. Using a yeast two-hybrid assay, a protein inhibitor of activated STAT1 (PIAS1) was isolated as a PTP1B-interacting protein. Here, we show that PIAS1, which functions as a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) E3 ligase, associates with PTP1B in mammalian fibroblasts and catalyses sumoylation of PTP1B. Sumoylation of PTP1B reduces its catalytic activity and inhibits the negative effect of PTP1B on insulin receptor signalling and on transformation by the oncogene v-crk. Insulin-stimulated sumoylation of endogenous PTP1B results in a transient downregulation of the enzyme; this event does not occur when the endogenous enzyme is replaced with a sumoylation-resistant mutant of PTP1B. These results suggest that sumoylation, which has been implicated primarily in processes in the nucleus and nuclear pore, also modulates a key enzyme-substrate signalling complex that regulates metabolism and cell proliferation.

17292828|a|In response to DNA damage, eukaryotic cells activate ATM-Chk2 and/or ATR-Chk1 to arrest the cell cycle and initiate DNA repair. We show that, in the absence of p53, cells depend on a third cell-cycle checkpoint pathway involving p38MAPK/MK2 for cell-cycle arrest and survival after DNA damage. MK2 depletion in p53-deficient cells, but not in p53 wild-type cells, caused abrogation of the Cdc25A-mediated S phase checkpoint after cisplatin exposure and loss of the Cdc25B-mediated G2/M checkpoint following doxorubicin treatment, resulting in mitotic catastrophe and pronounced regression of murine tumors in vivo. We show that the Chk1 inhibitor UCN-01 also potently inhibits MK2, suggesting that its clinical efficacy results from the simultaneous disruption of two critical checkpoint pathways in p53-defective cells.

17314099|a|NM23-H1 is a member of the NM23/NDP kinase gene family and a putative metastasis suppressor. Previously, a screen for NM23-H1-interacting proteins that could potentially modulate its activity identified serine-threonine kinase receptor-associated protein (STRAP), a transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta receptor-interacting protein. Through the use of cysteine to serine amino acid substitution mutants of NM23-H1 (C4S, C109S, and C145S) and STRAP (C152S, C270S, and C152S/C270S), we demonstrated that the association between these two proteins is dependent on Cys(145) of NM23-H1 and Cys(152) and Cys(270) of STRAP but did not appear to involve Cys(4) and Cys(109) of NM23-H1, suggesting that a disulfide linkage involving Cys(145) of NM23-H1 and Cys(152) or Cys(270) of STRAP mediates complex formation. The interaction was dependent on the presence of dithiothreitol or beta-mercaptoethanol but not H(2)O(2). Ectopic expression of wild-type NM23-H1, but not NM23-H1(C145S), negatively regulated TGF-beta signaling in a dose-dependent manner, enhanced stable association between the TGF-beta receptor and Smad7, and prevented nuclear translocation of Smad3. Similarly, wild-type NM23-H1 inhibited TGF-beta-induced apoptosis and growth inhibition, whereas NM23-H1(C145S) had no effect. Knockdown of NM23-H1 by small interfering RNA stimulated TGF-beta signaling. Coexpression of wild-type STRAP, but not STRAP(C152S/C270S), significantly stimulated NM23-H1-induced growth of HaCaT cells. These results suggest that the direct interaction of NM23-H1 and STRAP is important for the regulation of TGF-beta-dependent biological activity as well as NM23-H1 activity.

17254966|a|p27Kip1 controls cell proliferation by binding to and regulating the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). Here we show that Cdk inhibition and p27 stability are regulated through direct phosphorylation by tyrosine kinases. A conserved tyrosine residue (Y88) in the Cdk-binding domain of p27 can be phosphorylated by the Src-family kinase Lyn and the oncogene product BCR-ABL. Y88 phosphorylation does not prevent p27 binding to cyclin A/Cdk2. Instead, it causes phosphorylated Y88 and the entire inhibitory 3(10)-helix of p27 to be ejected from the Cdk2 active site, thus restoring partial Cdk activity. Importantly, this allows Y88-phosphorylated p27 to be efficiently phosphorylated on threonine 187 by Cdk2 which in turn promotes its SCF-Skp2-dependent degradation. This direct link between transforming tyrosine kinases and p27 may provide an explanation for Cdk kinase activities observed in p27 complexes and for premature p27 elimination in cells that have been transformed by activated tyrosine kinases.

17254968|a|Like apoptosis, oncogene-induced senescence is a barrier to tumor development. However, relatively little is known about the signaling pathways mediating the senescence response. p38-regulated/activated protein kinase (PRAK) is a p38 MAPK substrate whose physiological functions are poorly understood. Here we describe a role for PRAK in tumor suppression by demonstrating that PRAK mediates senescence upon activation by p38 in response to oncogenic ras. PRAK deficiency in mice enhances DMBA-induced skin carcinogenesis, coinciding with compromised senescence induction. In primary cells, inactivation of PRAK prevents senescence and promotes oncogenic transformation. Furthermore, we show that PRAK activates p53 by direct phosphorylation. We propose that phosphorylation of p53 by PRAK following activation of p38 MAPK by ras plays an important role in ras-induced senescence and tumor suppression.

17218255|a|Circadian rhythms are endogenous oscillations of physiological and behavioral phenomena with period length of approximately 24 hr. A mutation in human Period 2 (hPER2), a gene crucial for resetting the central clock in response to light, is associated with familial advanced sleep phase syndrome (FASPS), an autosomal dominant condition with early morning awakening and early sleep times. The FASPS hPER2 S662G mutation resulted in PER2 being hypophosphorylated by casein kinase I (CKI) in vitro. We generated transgenic mice carrying the FASPS hPER2 S662G mutation and faithfully recapitulate the human phenotype. We show that phosphorylation at S662 leads to increased PER2 transcription and suggest that phosphorylation at another site leads to PER2 degradation. Altering CKIdelta dosage modulates the S662 phenotype demonstrating that CKIdelta can regulate period through PER2 in vivo. Modeling a naturally occurring human variant in mice has yielded novel insights into PER2 regulation.

17280616|a|Cancer therapies directed at specific molecular targets in signaling pathways of cancer cells, such as tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors and trastuzumab, have proven useful for treatment of advanced breast cancers. However, increased risk of endometrial cancer with long-term tamoxifen administration and of bone fracture due to osteoporosis in postmenopausal women undergoing aromatase inhibitor therapy are recognized side effects. These side effects as well as drug resistance make it necessary to search for novel molecular targets for drugs on the basis of well-characterized mechanisms of action.

17309103|a|The protein SET is involved in essential cell processes such as chromatin remodeling, apoptosis and cell cycle progression. It also plays a critical role in cell transformation and tumorogenesis. With the aim to study new SET functions we have developed a system to identify SET-binding proteins by combining affinity chromatography, MS, and functional studies. We prepared SET affinity chromatography columns by coupling the protein to activated Sepharose 4B. The proteins from mouse liver lysates that bind to the SET affinity columns were resolved with 2-DE and identified by MS using a MALDI-TOF. This experimental approach allowed the recognition of a number of SET-binding proteins which have been classified in functional clusters. The identification of four of these proteins (CK2, eIF2alpha, glycogen phosphorylase (GP), and TCP1-beta) was confirmed by Western blotting and their in vivo interactions with SET were demonstrated by immunoprecipitation. Functional experiments revealed that SET is a substrate of CK2 in vitro and that SET interacts with the active form of GP but not with its inactive form. These data confirm this proteomic approach as a useful tool for identifying new protein-protein interactions.

17254967|a|The kinase inhibitor p27Kip1 regulates the G1 cell cycle phase. Here, we present data indicating that the oncogenic kinase Src regulates p27 stability through phosphorylation of p27 at tyrosine 74 and tyrosine 88. Src inhibitors increase cellular p27 stability, and Src overexpression accelerates p27 proteolysis. Src-phosphorylated p27 is shown to inhibit cyclin E-Cdk2 poorly in vitro, and Src transfection reduces p27-cyclin E-Cdk2 complexes. Our data indicate that phosphorylation by Src impairs the Cdk2 inhibitory action of p27 and reduces its steady-state binding to cyclin E-Cdk2 to facilitate cyclin E-Cdk2-dependent p27 proteolysis. Furthermore, we find that Src-activated breast cancer lines show reduced p27 and observe a correlation between Src activation and reduced nuclear p27 in 482 primary human breast cancers. Importantly, we report that in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cell lines, Src inhibition can increase p27 levels and restore tamoxifen sensitivity. These data provide a new rationale for Src inhibitors in cancer therapy.

17196367|a|Protein kinase D localizes in the Golgi and regulates protein transport from the Golgi to the plasma membrane. In the present study, we found that PKD3, a novel member of the PKD family, and its fluorescent protein fusions localized in the Golgi and in the vesicular structures that are in part marked by endosome markers. Fluorescent recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) showed that the PKD3-associated vesicular structures were constantly forming and dissolving, reflecting active subcellular structures. FRAP on plasma membrane-located PKD3 indicated a slower recovery of PKD3 fluorescent signal compared to those of PKC isoforms, implying a different targeting mechanism at the plasma membrane. VAMP2, the vesicle-localized v-SNARE, was later identified as a novel binding partner of PKD3 through yeast two-hybrid screening. PKD3 directly interacted with VAMP2 in vitro and in vivo, and colocalized in part with VAMP2 vesicles in cells. PKD3 did not phosphorylate VAMP-GFP and the purified GST-VAMP2 protein in in vitro phosphorylation assays. Rather, PKD3 was found to promote the recruitment of VAMP2 vesicles to the plasma membrane in response to PMA, while the kinase dead PKD3 abolished this effect. Thus, the kinase activity of PKD3 was required for PMA-induced plasma membrane trafficking of VAMP2. In summary, our findings suggest that PKD3 localizes to vesicular structures that are part of the endocytic compartment. The vesicular distribution may be attributed in part to the direct interaction between PKD3 and vesicle-associated membrane protein VAMP2, through which PKD3 may regulate VAMP2 vesicle trafficking by facilitating its recruitment to the target membrane.

17088250|a|Spectrin tetramers are cytoskeletal proteins required in the formation of complex animal tissues. Mammalian alphaII- and betaII-spectrin subunits form dimers that associate head to head with high affinity to form tetramers, but it is not known if this interaction is regulated. We show here that the short C-terminal splice variant of betaII-spectrin (betaIISigma2) is a substrate for phosphorylation. In vitro, protein kinase CK2 phosphorylates Ser-2110 and Thr-2159; protein kinase A phosphorylates Thr-2159. Antiphospho-Thr-2159 peptide antibody detected phosphorylated betaIISigma2 in Cos-1 cells. Immunoreactivity was increased in Cos-1 cells by treatment with forskolin, indicating that phosphorylation is promoted by elevated cAMP. The effect of forskolin was counteracted by the cAMP-dependent kinase inhibitor, H89. In vitro, protein kinase A phosphorylation of an active fragment of betaIISigma2 greatly reduced its interaction with alphaII-spectrin at the tetramerization site. Mutation of Thr-2159 to alanine eliminated inhibition by phosphorylation. Among the processes that require spectrin in mammals is the formation of neurites (incipient nerve axons). We tested the relationship of spectrin phosphorylation to neuritogenesis by transfecting the neuronal cell line, PC12, with enhanced green fluorescent protein-coupled fragments of betaIISigma2-spectrin predicted to act as inhibitors of spectrin tetramer formation. Both wild-type and T2159E mutant fragments allowed normal neuritogenesis in PC12 cells in response to nerve growth factor. The mutant T2159A inhibited neuritogenesis. Because the T2159A mutant represents a high affinity inhibitor of tetramer formation, we conclude that tetramers are requisite for neuritogenesis. Furthermore, because both the T2159E mutant and the wild-type allow neuritogenesis, we conclude that the short C-terminal betaII-spectrin is phosphorylated during this process.

17110335|a|DNA-responsive checkpoints prevent cell-cycle progression following DNA damage or replication inhibition. The mitotic activator Cdc25 is suppressed by checkpoints through inhibitory phosphorylation at Ser287 (Xenopus numbering) and docking of 14-3-3. Ser287 phosphorylation is a major locus of G2/M checkpoint control, although several checkpoint-independent kinases can phosphorylate this site. We reported previously that mitotic entry requires 14-3-3 removal and Ser287 dephosphorylation. We show here that DNA-responsive checkpoints also activate PP2A/B56delta phosphatase complexes to dephosphorylate Cdc25 at a site distinct from Ser287 (T138), the phosphorylation of which is required for 14-3-3 release. However, phosphorylation of T138 is not sufficient for 14-3-3 release from Cdc25. Our data suggest that creation of a 14-3-3 "sink," consisting of phosphorylated 14-3-3 binding intermediate filament proteins, including keratins, coupled with reduced Cdc25-14-3-3 affinity, contribute to Cdc25 activation. These observations identify PP2A/B56delta as a central checkpoint effector and suggest a mechanism for controlling 14-3-3 interactions to promote mitosis.

17157788|a|Che-1 is a RNA polymerase II-binding protein involved in the transcription of E2F target genes and induction of cell proliferation. Here we show that Che-1 contributes to DNA damage response and that its depletion sensitizes cells to anticancer agents. The checkpoint kinases ATM/ATR and Chk2 interact with Che-1 and promote its phosphorylation and accumulation in response to DNA damage. These Che-1 modifications induce a specific recruitment of Che-1 on the TP53 and p21 promoters. Interestingly, it has a profound effect on the basal expression of p53, which is preserved following DNA damage. Notably, Che-1 contributes to the maintenance of the G2/M checkpoint induced by DNA damage. These findings identify a mechanism by which checkpoint kinases regulate responses to DNA damage.

16491121|a|To gain insight into the function of human protein kinase X (PrKX), a signal-transduction protein required for macrophage differentiation, we identified regulatory subunit I alpha of protein kinase A, T54 and Smad6 as partners for this protein using a yeast two-hybrid interaction screen. Interactions between PrKX and these proteins were substantiated by co-immunoprecipitation. Interaction between Smad6 and PrKX was also confirmed in human myeloid HL-60 cells following their phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-induced differentiation into macrophages. In vitro phosphorylation assays demonstrated that PrKX phosphorylates Smad6 at a serine residue. Mutagenesis of this site resulted in abrogation of PrKX phosphorylation. Both PrKX and Smad6 were shown to be co-localized to the nuclear compartment of HL-60 cells during their macrophage differentiation where PrKX levels are induced and Smad6 protein levels remain relatively constant while levels of serine phosphorylation of Smad6 increase. By using in vitro electrophoretic mobility shift assays and in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation, we also demonstrate that during macrophage differentiation Smad6 displays an increased binding to the human osteopontin, Id2, and Hex gene promoters, which correlates to an observed increased expression of these genes. Finally, vector-based RNA interference experiments established that both Smad6 and PrKX proteins are required for PMA-induced cell attachment and spreading.

16472662|a|The activated Cdc42 associated kinases (ACKs) are nonreceptor tyrosine kinases that are specific targets of Cdc42. To study the biochemical properties of ACK1, we expressed and purified the enzyme using the baculovirus/Sf9 cell system. This ACK1 construct contains (from N- to C-terminus) the kinase catalytic domain, SH3 domain, and Cdc42-binding CRIB domain. We describe enzyme activity assays based on synthetic peptide substrates. The best such substrate is a peptide derived from the site of ACK1-catalyzed phosphorylation of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP). Although the SH3 and CRIB domains of purified ACK1 are able to bind ligands (a polyproline peptide and Cdc42, respectively), the ligands did not stimulate in vitro tyrosine kinase activity. Purified ACK1 undergoes autophosphorylation at Tyr284, and autophosphorylation increases kinase activity.

16456544|a|Vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) induces actin reorganization and migration of endothelial cells through a p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. LIM-kinase 1 (LIMK1) induces actin remodeling by phosphorylating and inactivating cofilin, an actin-depolymerizing factor. In this study, we demonstrate that activation of LIMK1 by MAPKAPK-2 (MK2; a downstream kinase of p38 MAPK) represents a novel signaling pathway in VEGF-A-induced cell migration. VEGF-A induced LIMK1 activation and cofilin phosphorylation, and this was inhibited by the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580. Although p38 phosphorylated LIMK1 at Ser-310, it failed to activate LIMK1 directly; however, MK2 activated LIMK1 by phosphorylation at Ser-323. Expression of a Ser-323-non-phosphorylatable mutant of LIMK1 suppressed VEGF-A-induced stress fiber formation and cell migration; however, expression of a Ser-323-phosphorylation-mimic mutant enhanced these processes. Knockdown of MK2 by siRNA suppressed VEGF-A-induced LIMK1 activation, stress fiber formation, and cell migration. Expression of kinase-dead LIMK1 suppressed VEGF-A-induced tubule formation. These findings suggest that MK2-mediated LIMK1 phosphorylation/activation plays an essential role in VEGF-A-induced actin reorganization, migration, and tubule formation of endothelial cells.

16504183|a|The FOXM1 forkhead proteins, originally identified as M-phase phosphoproteins, are proliferation-associated transcriptional regulators involved in cell cycle progression, genetic stability and tumorigenesis. Here we demonstrate that Cyclin-dependent kinases regulate the transcriptional activity of FOXM1c. This is independent of an N-terminal negative regulatory domain and of the forkhead DNA binding domain. Instead we mapped the responsive sites in the transactivation domain. A combination of three phosphorylation sites mediates the Cyclin E and Cyclin A/CDK2 effects. Our findings provide evidence for a novel Cyclin E/CDK2 substrate that functions in cell cycle control.

16458891|a|p205 is a member of the interferon-inducible p200 family of proteins that regulate cell proliferation. Over-expression of p205 inhibits cell growth, although its mechanism of action is currently unknown. Therefore, we evaluated the effect of p205 on the p53 and Rb-dependent pathways of cell cycle regulation. p205 expression results in elevated levels of p21, and activates the p21 promoter in vitro in a p53-dependent manner. In addition, p205 induces increased expression of Rb, and binds directly to Rb and p53. Interestingly, p205 also induces growth inhibition independent of p53 and Rb by delaying G2/M progression in proliferating cells, and is a substrate for Cdk2 kinase activity. Finally, we have identified other binding partners of p205 by a yeast two-hybrid screen, including the paired homeodomain protein HoxB2. Taken together, our results indicate that p205 induces growth arrest by interaction with multiple transcription factors that regulate the cell cycle, including but not entirely dependent on the Rb- and p53-mediated pathways of growth inhibition.

16388599|a|Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is implicated in a number of signaling pathways including those mediated by insulin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), and the Src family kinases. The scaffolding protein caveolin-1 is also a participant in these pathways and is specifically phosphorylated on tyrosine 14, when these pathways are activated. Here, we provide evidence that PTP1B can efficiently catalyze the removal of the phosphoryl group from phosphocaveolin-1. Overexpression of PTP1B decreases tyrosine 14 phosphorylation in caveolin-1, while expression of the substrate-trapping mutant PTP1B/D181A causes the accumulation of phosphocaveolin-1 and prevents its dephosphorylation by endogenous PTPs. We further demonstrate that PTP1B physically associates with caveolin-1. Finally, we show that inhibition of PTP1B activity with a potent and specific small molecule PTP1B inhibitor blocks the PTP1B-catalyzed caveolin-1 dephosphorylation both in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, the results strongly suggest that caveolin-1 is a specific substrate for PTP1B. Identification of caveolin-1 as a PTP1B substrate represents an important new step in further understanding the signaling pathways regulated by PTP1B.

16430890|a|Two alpha-type CK2-activated PKAs (CK2-aPKAIalpha and CK2-aPKAIIalpha) were biochemically characterized in vitro using GST-HBV core fusion protein (GST-Hcore) and GST-Hcore157B as phosphate acceptors. It was found that (i), in the absence of cAMP, these two CK2-aPKAs phosphorylated both Ser-170 and Ser-178 on GST-Hcore and Hcore157B; (ii) this phosphorylation was approx. 4-fold higher than their phosphorylation by cAMP-activated PKAs; and (iii) suramin effectively inhibited the phosphorylation of Hcore157B by CK2-aPKAIIalpha through its direct binding to Hcore157B in vitro. These results suggest that high phosphorylation of HBV-CP by two CK2-aPKAs, in the absence of cAMP, may be involved in the pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) encapsidation and DNA-replication in HBV-infected cells.

16500650|a|In humans, many responses to hypoxia including angiogenesis and erythropoiesis are mediated by the alpha/beta-heterodimeric transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor (HIF). The stability and/or activity of human HIF-1alpha are modulated by post-translational modifications including prolyl and asparaginyl hydroxylation, phosphorylation, and reportedly by acetylation of the side-chain of Lys532 by ARD1 (arrest defective protein 1 homologue), an acetyltransferase. Using purified recombinant human ARD1 (hARD1) we did not observe ARD1-mediated N-acetylation of Lys532 using fragments of HIF-1alpha. However, recombinant hARD1 from Escherichia coli was produced with partial N-terminal acetylation and was observed to undergo slow self-mediated N-terminal acetylation. The observations are consistent with the other data indicating that hARD1, at least alone, does not acetylate HIF-1alpha, and with reports on the N-terminal acetyltransferase activity of a recently reported heterodimeric complex comprising hARD1 and N-acetyltransferase protein.

16364302|a|Currently, we found that the 70-kDa p70 S6 kinase (p70S6K) directly phosphorylates tau at S262, S214, and T212 sites in vitro. By immunoprecipitation, p-p70S6K (T421/S424) showed a close association with p-tau (S262 and S396/404). Zinc-induced p70S6K activation could only upregulate translation of total S6 and tau but not global proteins in SH-SY5Y cells. The requirement of p70S6K activation was confirmed in the SH-SY5Y cells that overexpress wild-type htau40. Level of p-p70S6K (T421/S424) was only significantly correlated with p-tau at S262, S214, and T212, but not T212/S214, in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains. These suggested that p70S6K might contribute to tau related pathologies in AD brains.

16456540|a|Nuclear retinoic acid (RA) receptors (RARs) activate gene expression through dynamic interactions with coregulators in coordination with the ligand and phosphorylation processes. Here we show that during RA-dependent activation of the RARalpha isotype, the p160 coactivator pCIP/ACTR/AIB-1/RAC-3/TRAM-1/SRC-3 is phosphorylated by p38MAPK. SRC-3 phosphorylation has been correlated to an initial facilitation of RARalpha-target genes activation, via the control of the dynamics of the interactions of the coactivator with RARalpha. Then, phosphorylation inhibits transcription via promoting the degradation of SRC-3. In line with this, inhibition of p38MAPK markedly enhances RARalpha-mediated transcription and RA-dependent induction of cell differentiation. SRC-3 phosphorylation and degradation occur only within the context of RARalpha complexes, suggesting that the RAR isotype defines a phosphorylation code through dictating the accessibility of the coactivator to p38MAPK. We propose a model in which RARalpha transcriptional activity is regulated by SRC-3 through coordinated events that are fine-tuned by RA and p38MAPK.

16579989|a|Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF/KLF1) is an erythroid specific, C(2)H(2) zinc finger transcription factor that is essential for the proper chromatin structure and expression of the adult beta-globin gene. Herein, we determine that 26S proteasome inhibitors lead to an accumulation of EKLF protein in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. In addition, EKLF half-life in both MEL cells (<3h) and fetal liver cells (between 6 and 9h) is stabilized in the presence of these inhibitors. EKLF is ubiquitinated in vivo, however its modification does not rely on a particular internal lysine. Finally, EKLF contains two PEST sequences within its N-terminus that have no effect on the ability of EKLF to be ubiquitinated but contribute to its destabilization.

16364312|a|Yersinia encodes a protein kinase, YpkA, which disrupts the actin cytoskeleton. Using an approach termed chemical genetics, we identified a 36-kDa substrate for YpkA in both J774 lysates and bovine brain cytosol. Mass spectrometry analysis identified this substrate as FLJ20113, an open reading frame that corresponds to otubain 1, a deubiquitinating enzyme implicated in immune cell clonal anergy. We demonstrate that otubain 1 is phosphorylated by YpkA in vitro and interacts with YpkA and actin in vivo. Identification of otubain 1 as a YpkA substrate suggests that regulation of immune cell anergy may be a survival mechanism for Yersinia.

16537444|a|Protein kinases are a large family of cell signaling mediators undergoing intensive research to identify inhibitors or modulators useful for medicine. As one strategy, small-molecule compounds that bind the active site with high affinity can be used to inhibit the enzyme activity. X-ray crystallography is a powerful method to reveal the structures of the kinase active sites, and thus aid in the design of high-affinity, selective inhibitors. However, a limitation still exists in the ability to produce purified kinases in amounts sufficient for crystallography. Furthermore, kinases exist in different conformation states as part of their normal regulation, and the ability to prepare crystals of kinases in these various states also remains a limitation. In this study, the c-Abl, c-Src, and c-Met kinases are produced in high yields in Escherichia coli by using a bicistronic vector encoding the PTP1B tyrosine phosphatase. A 100-fold lower dose of the inhibitor, Imatinib, was observed to inhibit the unphosphorylated form of c-Abl kinase prepared by using this vector, compared to the phosphorylated form produced without PTP1B, consistent with the known selectivity of this inhibitor for the unactivated conformation of the enzyme. Unphosphorylated c-Met kinase produced with this vector was used to obtain the crystal structure, at 2.15-A resolution, of the autoinhibited form of the kinase domain, revealing an intricate network of interactions involving c-Met residues documented previously to cause dysregulation when mutated in several cancers.

16456541|a|The protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) acts on several kinases in the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway but whether a specific holoenzyme dephosphorylates ERK and whether this activity is controlled during mitogenic stimulation is unknown. By using both RNA interference and overexpression of PP2A B regulatory subunits, we show that B56, but not B, family members of PP2A increase ERK dephosphorylation, without affecting its activation by MEK. Induction of the early gene product and ERK substrate IEX-1 (ier3) by growth factors leads to opposite effects and reverses B56-PP2A-mediated ERK dephosphorylation. IEX-1 binds to B56 subunits and pERK independently, enhances B56 phosphorylation by ERK at a conserved Ser/Pro site in this complex and triggers dissociation from the catalytic subunit. This is the first demonstration of the involvement of B56-containing PP2A in ERK dephosphorylation and of a B56-specific cellular protein inhibitor regulating its activity in an ERK-dependent fashion. In addition, our results raise a new paradigm in ERK signaling in which ERK associated to a substrate can transphosphorylate nearby proteins.

16407301|a|MAPK/ERK kinase kinase 3 (MEKK3) is a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAP3K) that functions upstream of the MAP kinases and IkappaB kinase. Phosphorylation is believed to be a critical component for MEKK3-dependent signal transduction, but little is known about the phosphorylation sites of this MAP3K. To address this question, point mutations were introduced in the activation loop (T-loop), substituting alanine for serine or threonine, and the mutants were transfected into HEK293 Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen cells. MEKK3-dependent activation of an NF-kappaB reporter gene as well as ERK, JNK, and p38 MAP kinases correlated with a requirement for serine at position 526. Constitutively active mutants of MEKK3, consisting of S526D and S526E, were capable of activating a NF-kappaB luciferase reporter gene as well as ERK and MEK, suggesting that a negative charge at Ser526 was necessary for MEKK3 activity and implicating Ser526 as a phosphorylation site. An antibody was developed that specifically recognized phospho-Ser526 of MEKK3 but did not recognize the S526A point mutant. The catalytically inactive (K391M) mutant of MEKK3 was not phosphorylated at Ser526, indicating that phosphorylation of Ser526 occurs via autophosphorylation. Endogenous MEKK3 was phosphorylated on Ser526 in response to osmotic stress. In addition, phosphorylation of Ser526 was required for MKK6 phosphorylation in vitro, whereas dephosphorylation of Ser526 was mediated by protein phosphatase 2A and sensitive to okadaic acid and sodium fluoride. Finally, the association between MEKK3 and 14-3-3 was dependent on Ser526 and prevented dephosphorylation of Ser526. In summary, Ser526 of MEKK3 is an autophosphorylation site within the T-loop that is regulated by PP2A and 14-3-3 proteins.

16511572|a|It has been shown that MDMX inhibits the activity of the tumor suppressor p53 by primarily cooperating with the p53 feedback regulator MDM2. Here, our study shows that this inhibition can be overcome by 14-3-3gamma and Chk1. 14-3-3gamma was identified as an MDMX-associated protein via an immuno-affinity purification-coupled mass spectrometry. Consistently, 14-3-3gamma directly interacted with MDMX in vitro, and this interaction was stimulated by MDMX phosphorylation in vitro and in cells. Interestingly, in response to UV irradiation, the wild-type, but not the kinase-dead mutant, Chk1 phosphorylated MDMX at serine 367, enhanced the 14-3-3gamma-MDMX binding and the cytoplasmic retaining of MDMX. The Chk1 specific inhibitor UCN-01 repressed all of these effects. Moreover, overexpression of 14-3-3gamma, but not its mutant K50E, which did not bind to MDMX, suppressed MDMX-enhanced p53 ubiquitination, leading to p53 stabilization and activation. Finally, ablation of 14-3-3gamma by siRNA reduced UV-induced p53 level and G1 arrest. Thus, these results demonstrate 14-3-3gamma and Chk1 as two novel regulators of MDMX in response to UV irradiation.

16376338|a|Recognition of phosphorylated serine/threonine-containing motifs by 14-3-3 depends on the dimerization of 14-3-3. However, the molecular cues that control 14-3-3 dimerization are not well understood. In order to identify proteins that control 14-3-3 dimerization, we analyzed proteins that have effects on 14-3-3 dimerization and report that protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylates 14-3-3zeta at a specific residue (Ser58). Phosphorylation by PKA leads to modulation of 14-3-3zeta dimerization and affect its interaction with partner proteins. Substitution of Ser58 to Ala completely abolished phosphorylation of 14-3-3zeta by PKA. A phospho-mimic mutant of 14-3-3zeta, Ser58 to Glu substitution, failed to form homodimers, showed reduced interaction with 14-3-3epsilon and p53, and could not enhance transcriptional activity of p53. Moreover, activation of PKA decreases and inhibition of PKA increases the dimerization of 14-3-3zeta and the functional interaction of 14-3-3zeta with p53. Therefore, our results suggest that PKA is a new member of protein kinases that can phosphorylate and impair the function of 14-3-3.

16446437|a|To date, there is no reasonable explanation as to why plaques and tangles simultaneously accumulate in Alzheimer's disease (AD). We demonstrate here by Western blotting and ELISA that a stable complex can form between tau and amyloid-beta protein (Abeta). This complex enhances tau phosphorylation by GSK3beta, but the phosphorylation then promotes dissociation of the complex. We have localized the sites of this interaction by using peptide membrane arrays. Abeta binds to multiple tau peptides, especially those in exons 7 and 9. This binding is sharply reduced or abolished by phosphorylation of specific serine and threonine residues. Conversely, tau binds to multiple Abeta peptides in the mid to C-terminal regions of Abeta. This binding is also significantly decreased by GSK3beta phosphorylation of tau. We used surface plasmon resonance to determine the binding affinity of Abeta for tau and found it to be in the low nanomolar range and almost 1,000-fold higher than tau for itself. In soluble extracts from AD and control brain tissue, we detected Abeta bound to tau in ELISAs. We also found by double immunostaining of AD brain tissue that phosphorylated tau and Abeta form separate insoluble complexes within the same neurons and their processes. We hypothesize that in AD, an initial step in the pathogenesis may be the intracellular binding of soluble Abeta to soluble nonphosphorylated tau, thus promoting tau phosphorylation and Abeta nucleation. Blocking the sites where Abeta initially binds to tau might arrest the simultaneous formation of plaques and tangles in AD.

16373505|a|Phosphorylation of the alpha-subunit of translation eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF2) leads to the inhibition of protein synthesis in response to diverse conditions of stress. Serine/threonine RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is an eIF2alpha kinase family member induced by type I IFN and activated in response to dsRNA or virus infection. Herein, we demonstrate that human PKR is a dual specificity kinase phosphorylated at Y101, Y162 and Y293 in vitro and in vivo. Site-specific tyrosine phosphorylation is essential for efficient dsRNA-binding, dimerization, kinase activation and eIF2alpha phosphorylation of PKR. Biologically, tyrosine phosphorylation of PKR mediates the antiviral and antiproliferative properties of the kinase through its ability to control translation. Our data demonstrate an important role of tyrosine phosphorylation in biochemical and biological processes caused or mediated by the activation of the eIF2alpha kinase PKR.

16407123|a|Transcription consists of a series of highly regulated steps: assembly of a preinitiation complex (PIC) at the promoter nucleated by TFIID, followed by initiation, elongation, and termination. The present study has focused on the role of the TFIID component, TAF7, in regulating transcription initiation. In TFIID, TAF7 binds to TAF1 and inhibits its intrinsic acetyl transferase activity. We now report that although TAF7 remains bound to TAF1 and associated with TFIID during the formation of the PIC, TAF7 dissociates from the PIC upon transcription initiation. Entry of polymerase II into the assembling PIC is associated with TAF1 and TAF7 phosphorylation, coincident with TAF7 release. We propose that the TFIID composition is dynamic and that TAF7 functions as a check-point regulator suppressing premature transcription initiation until PIC assembly is complete.

16301747|a|The B cell antigen receptor (BCR)-mediated activation of IkappaB kinase (IKK) and nuclear factor-kappaB require protein kinase C (PKC)beta; however, the mechanism by which PKCbeta regulates IKK is unclear. Here, we demonstrate that another protein kinase, TGFbeta-activated kinase (TAK)1, is essential for IKK activation in response to BCR stimulation. TAK1 interacts with the phosphorylated CARMA1 (also known as caspase recruitment domain [CARD]11, Bimp3) and this interaction is mediated by PKCbeta. IKK is also recruited to the CARMA1-Bcl10-mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue 1 adaptor complex in a PKCbeta-dependent manner. Hence, our data suggest that phosphorylation of CARMA1, mediated by PKCbeta, brings two key protein kinases, TAK1 and IKK, into close proximity, thereby allowing TAK1 to phosphorylate IKK.

16293623|a|The DNA damage-response regulators ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated) and ATR (ATM-Rad3-related) are structurally and functionally related protein kinases that exhibit nearly identical substrate specificities in vitro. Current paradigms hold that the relative contributions of ATM and ATR to nuclear substrate phosphorylation are dictated by the type of initiating DNA lesion; ATM-dependent substrate phosphorylation is principally activated by DNA double strand breaks, whereas ATR-dependent substrate phosphorylation is induced by UV light and other forms of DNA replication stress. In this report, we employed the cyclic AMP-response element-binding (CREB) protein to provide evidence for substrate discrimination by ATM and ATR in cellulo. ATM and ATR phosphorylate CREB in vitro, and CREB is phosphorylated on Ser-121 in intact cells in response to ionizing radiation (IR), UV light, and hydroxyurea. The UV light- and hydroxyurea-induced phosphorylation of CREB was delayed in comparison to the canonical ATR substrate CHK1, suggesting potentially different mechanisms of phosphorylation. UV light-induced CREB phosphorylation temporally correlated with ATM autophosphorylation on Ser-1981, and an ATM-specific small interfering RNA suppressed CREB phosphorylation in response to this stimulus. UV light-induced CREB phosphorylation was absent in ATM-deficient cells, confirming that ATM is required for CREB phosphorylation in UV irradiation-damaged cells. Interestingly, RNA interference-mediated suppression of ATR partially inhibited CREB phosphorylation in response to UV light, which correlated with reduced phosphorylation of ATM on Ser-1981. These findings suggest that ATM is the major genotoxin-induced CREB kinase in mammalian cells and that ATR lies upstream of ATM in a UV light-induced signaling pathway.

16330544|a|Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1), a serine/threonine kinase that regulates DNA damage checkpoints, is destabilized when heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is inhibited, suggesting that Chk1 is an Hsp90 client. In the present work we examined the interplay between Chk1 and Hsp90 in intact cells, identified a source of unchaperoned Chk1, and report the in vitro chaperoning of Chk1 in reticulocyte lysates and with purified chaperones and co-chaperones. We find that bacterially expressed Chk1 is post-translationally chaperoned to an active kinase. This reaction minimally requires Hsp90, Hsp70, Hsp40, Cdc37, and the protein kinase CK2. The co-chaperone Hop, although not essential for the activation of Chk1 in vitro, enhanced the chaperoning process, whereas the co-chaperone p23 did not stimulate the chaperoning reaction. Additionally, we found that the C-terminal regulatory domain of Chk1 affects the association of Chk1 with Hsp90. Collectively these results provide new insights into Hsp90-dependent chaperoning of a client kinase and identify a novel, biochemically tractable model system that will be useful to further dissect the Hsp90-dependent chaperoning of this important and ubiquitous class of Hsp90 clients.

16316999|a|Expression and activity of the germinal center kinase, Ste20-like kinase (SLK), are increased during kidney development and recovery from ischemic acute renal failure. In this study, we characterize the activation and functional role of SLK. SLK underwent dimerization via the C-terminal domain, and dimerization enhanced SLK activity. In contrast, the C-terminal domain of SLK did not dimerize with a related kinase, Mst1, and did not affect Mst1 activity. Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of SLK were not associated with changes in kinase activity. SLK induced phosphorylation of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase-1 (ASK1) and increased ASK1 activity, indicating that ASK1 is a substrate of SLK. Moreover, SLK stimulated phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase via ASK1, but not c-Jun N-terminal kinase nor extracellular signal-regulated kinase. Chemical anoxia and recovery during re-exposure to glucose (ischemia-reperfusion injury in cell culture) stimulated SLK activity. Overexpression of SLK enhanced anoxia/recovery-induced apoptosis, release of cytochrome c, and activities of caspase-8 and -9, and apoptosis was reduced significantly with p38 and caspase-9 inhibitors. Induction of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response by anoxia/recovery or tunicamycin (monitored by induction of Bip or Grp94 expression, phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2alpha subunit, expression of CHOP, and activation of caspase-12) was attenuated in cells that overexpress SLK. Thus, SLK is an anoxia/recovery-dependent kinase that is activated via homodimerization and that signals via ASK1 and p38 to promote apoptosis. Attenuation of the protective aspects of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response by SLK may contribute to its proapoptotic effect.

16365431|a|Signal-transducing adaptor protein-2 (STAP-2) is a recently identified adaptor protein that contains pleckstrin and Src homology 2-like domains as well as a YXXQ motif in its C-terminal region. Our previous studies have demonstrated that STAP-2 binds to STAT3 and STAT5, and regulates their signaling pathways. In the present study, STAP-2 was found to positively regulate LPS/TLR4-mediated signals in macrophages. Disruption of STAP-2 resulted in impaired LPS/TLR4-induced cytokine production and NF-kappaB activation. Conversely, overexpression of STAP-2 enhanced these LPS/TLR4-induced biological activities. STAP-2, particularly its Src homology 2-like domain, bound to both MyD88 and IkappaB kinase (IKK)-alphabeta, but not TNFR-associated factor 6 or IL-1R-associated kinase 1, and formed a functional complex composed of MyD88-STAP-2-IKK-alphabeta. These interactions augmented MyD88- and/or IKK-alphabeta-dependent signals, leading to enhancement of the NF-kappaB activity. These results demonstrate that STAP-2 may constitute an alternative LPS/TLR4 pathway for NF-kappaB activation instead of the TNFR-associated factor 6-IL-1R-associated kinase 1 pathway.

16293614|a|Protein-tyrosine kinases and Rho GTPases regulate many cellular processes, including the reorganization and dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton. The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) and its homolog neuronal WASP (N-WASP) are effectors of the Rho GTPase Cdc42 and provide a direct link between activated membrane receptors and the actin cytoskeleton. WASP and N-WASP are also regulated by a large number of other activators, including protein-tyrosine kinases, phosphoinositides, and Src homology 3-containing adaptor proteins, and can therefore serve as signal integrators inside cells. Here we show that Cdc42 and the Src family kinase Lck cooperate at two levels to enhance WASP activation. First, autoinhibition in N-WASP decreases the efficiency (kcat/Km) of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the GTPase binding domain by 30- and 40-fold, respectively, and this effect is largely reversed by Cdc42. Second, Cdc42 and the Src homology 3-Src homology 2 module of Lck cooperatively stimulate the activity of phosphorylated WASP, with coupling energy of approximately 2.4 kcal/mol between the two activators. These combined effects provide mechanisms for high specificity in WASP activation by coincident GTPase and kinase signals.

16461343|a|Stimulation of mature T cells activates a downstream signaling cascade involving temporally and spatially regulated phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events mediated by protein-tyrosine kinases and phosphatases, respectively. PTPN22 (Lyp), a non-receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatase, is expressed exclusively in cells of hematopoietic origin, notably in T cells where it represses signaling through the T cell receptor. We used substrate trapping coupled with mass spectrometry-based peptide identification in an unbiased approach to identify physiological substrates of PTPN22. Several potential substrates were identified in lysates from pervanadate-stimulated Jurkat cells using PTPN22-D195A/C227S, an optimized substrate trap mutant of PTPN22. These included three novel PTPN22 substrates (Vav, CD3epsilon, and valosin containing protein) and two known substrates of PEP, the mouse homolog of PTPN22 (Lck and Zap70). T cell antigen receptor (TCR) zeta was also identified as a potential substrate in Jurkat lysates by direct immunoblotting. In vitro experiments with purified recombinant proteins demonstrated that PTPN22-D195A/C227S interacted directly with activated Lck, Zap70, and TCRzeta, confirming the initial substrate trap results. Native PTPN22 dephosphorylated Lck and Zap70 at their activating tyrosine residues Tyr-394 and Tyr-493, respectively, but not at the regulatory tyrosines Tyr-505 (Lck) or Tyr-319 (Zap70). Native PTPN22 also dephosphorylated TCRzeta in vitro and in cells, and its substrate trap variant co-immunoprecipitated with TCRzeta when both were coexpressed in 293T cells, establishing TCRzeta as a direct substrate of PTPN22.

16415179|a|The Mi-2/NuRD complex is a multi-subunit protein complex with enzymatic activities involving chromatin remodeling and histone deacetylation. Targeting of Mi-2/NuRD to methylated CpG sequences mediates gene repression. The function of p66alpha and of p66beta within the multiple subunits has not been addressed. Here, we analyzed the in vivo function and binding of both p66-paralogs. Both factors function in synergy, since knocking-down p66alpha affects the repressive function of p66beta and vice versa. Both proteins interact with MBD2 functionally and biochemically. Mutation of a single amino acid of p66alpha abolishes in vivo binding to MBD2 and interferes with MBD2-mediated repression. This loss of binding results in a diffuse nuclear localization in contrast to wild-type p66alpha that shows a speckled nuclear distribution. Furthermore, wild-type subnuclear distribution of p66alpha and p66beta depends on the presence of MBD2. Both proteins interact with the tails of all octamer histones in vitro, and acetylation of histone tails interferes with p66 binding. The conserved region 2 of p66alpha is required for histone tail interaction as well as for wild-type subnuclear distribution. These results suggest a two-interaction forward feedback binding mode, with a stable chromatin association only after deacetylation of the histones has occurred.

16319058|a|IkappaB kinase (IKK) catalytic subunits play a key role in cytokinemediated nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB signaling, and a loss of NF-kappaB function appears to inhibit inflammation and oncogenesis. Manumycin A is a potent and selective farnesyltransferase inhibitor with antitumor activity. We found that manumycin A caused a rapid and potent inhibition of IKK activity induced by tumor necrosis factor alpha in a number of cell types. Most unexpectedly, other classes of farnesyltransferase inhibitors had no inhibitory effect. To identify the molecular mechanisms of manumycin A action, cultured human HepG2 hepatoma cells were transiently transfected with various IKKalpha and IKKbeta constructs, and a striking difference in manumycin A sensitivity was observed. Furthermore, cells expressing wild-type IKKbeta and IKKbeta mutated in the activation loop at Cys-179 exhibited covalent homotypic dimerization of IKKbeta in response to manumycin A, whereas substitution of Cys-662 and -716 conferred protection against dimer formation. Direct inhibition of IKK activity and formation of stable IKKbeta dimers were observed in the presence of manumycin A that could be blocked by dithiothreitol. IKK interaction with the adaptor protein IKKgamma/NEMO was disrupted in manumycin A-treated cells. Most importantly, administration of manumycin A to mice xenografted with murine B16F10 tumors caused potent IKK-suppressive effects. Thus, manumycin A with its epoxyquinoid moieties plays an important regulatory function in IKK signaling through pathways distinct from its role as a protein farnesylation inhibitor.

16377624|a|The p53 tumor suppressor is activated in the cellular response to genotoxic stress. Transactivation of p53 target genes dictates cell cycle arrest and DNA repair or induction of apoptosis; however, a molecular mechanism responsible for these distinct functions remains unclear. Recent studies revealed that phosphorylation of p53 on Ser(46) was associated with induction of p53AIP1 expression, resulting in the commitment of the cell fate into apoptotic cell death. Moreover, upon exposure to genotoxic stress, p53DINP1 was expressed and recruited a kinase(s) to p53 that specifically phosphorylated Ser(46). Here, we show that the pro-apoptotic kinase, protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta), is involved in phosphorylation of p53 on Ser(46). PKCdelta-mediated phosphorylation is required for the interaction of PKCdelta with p53. The results also demonstrate that p53DINP1 associates with PKCdelta upon exposure to genotoxic agents. Consistent with these results, PKCdelta potentiates p53-dependent apoptosis by Ser(46) phosphorylation in response to genotoxic stress. These findings indicate that PKCdelta regulates p53 to induce apoptotic cell death in the cellular response to DNA damage.

16439210|a|The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) inhibitor Emi1 controls progression to S phase and mitosis by stabilizing key APC/C ubiquitination substrates, including cyclin A. Examining Emi1 binding proteins, we identified the Evi5 oncogene as a regulator of Emi1 accumulation. Evi5 antagonizes SCF(betaTrCP)-dependent Emi1 ubiquitination and destruction by binding to a site adjacent to Emi1's DSGxxS degron and blocking both degron phosphorylation by Polo-like kinases and subsequent betaTrCP binding. Thus, Evi5 functions as a stabilizing factor maintaining Emi1 levels in S/G2 phase. Evi5 protein accumulates in early G1 following Plk1 destruction and is degraded in a Plk1- and ubiquitin-dependent manner in early mitosis. Ablation of Evi5 induces precocious degradation of Emi1 by the Plk/SCF(betaTrCP) pathway, causing premature APC/C activation; cyclin destruction; cell-cycle arrest; centrosome overduplication; and, finally, mitotic catastrophe. We propose that the balance of Evi5 and Polo-like kinase activities determines the timely accumulation of Emi1 and cyclin, ensuring mitotic fidelity.

16533805|a|D-sites are a class of MAPK-docking sites that have been found in many MAPK regulators and substrates. A single functional, high affinity D-site has been identified near the N terminus of each of the MAPK kinases (MKKs or MEKs) MEK1, MEK2, MKK3, MKK4, and MKK6. Here we demonstrated that MKK7 recognizes its target JNK by a novel mechanism involving a partially cooperative interaction of three low affinity D-sites in the N-terminal domain of MKK7. Mutations of the conserved residues within any one of the three docking sites (D1, D2, and D3) disrupted the ability of the N-terminal domain of MKK7beta to bind JNK1 by about 50-70%. Moreover, mutation of any two of the three D-sites reduced binding by about 80-90%, and mutation of all three reduced binding by 95%. Full-length MKK7 containing combined D1/D2 mutations was compromised for binding to JNK1 and exhibited reduced JNK1 kinase activity when compared with wild-type MKK7. Peptide versions of the D-sites from MKK4 or the JIP-1 scaffold protein inhibited MKK7-JNK binding, suggesting that all three JNK regulators bind to the same region of JNK. Moreover, peptide versions of any of the three D-sites of MKK7 inhibited the ability of JNK1 and JNK2 to phosphorylate their transcription factor substrates c-Jun and ATF2, suggesting that D-site-containing substrates also compete with MKK7 for docking to JNK. Finally, MKK7-derived D-site peptides exhibited selective inhibition of JNK1 versus ERK2. We conclude that MKK7 contains three JNK-docking sites that interact to selectively bind JNK and contribute to JNK signal transmission and specificity.

16306228|a|The LKB1 tumour suppressor kinase phosphorylates and activates a number of protein kinases belonging to the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) subfamily. We have used a modified tandem affinity purification strategy to identify proteins that interact with AMPKalpha, as well as the twelve AMPK-related kinases that are activated by LKB1. The AMPKbeta and AMPKgamma regulatory subunits were associated with AMPKalpha, but not with any of the AMPK-related kinases, explaining why AMP does not influence the activity of these enzymes. In addition, we identified novel binding partners that interacted with one or more of the AMPK subfamily enzymes, including fat facets/ubiquitin specific protease-9 (USP9), AAA-ATPase-p97, adenine nucleotide translocase, protein phosphatase 2A holoenzyme and isoforms of the phospho-protein binding adaptor 14-3-3. Interestingly, the 14-3-3 isoforms bound directly to the T-loop Thr residue of QSK and SIK, after these were phosphorylated by LKB1. Consistent with this, the 14-3-3 isoforms failed to interact with non-phosphorylated QSK and SIK, in LKB1 knockout muscle or in HeLa cells in which LKB1 is not expressed. Moreover, mutation of the T-loop Thr phosphorylated by LKB1, prevented QSK and SIK from interacting with 14-3-3 in vitro. Binding of 14-3-3 to QSK and SIK, enhanced catalytic activity towards the TORC2 protein and the AMARA peptide, and was required for the cytoplasmic localization of SIK and for localization of QSK to punctate structures within the cytoplasm. To our knowledge, this study provides the first example of 14-3-3 binding directly to the T-loop of a protein kinase and influencing its catalytic activity and cellular localization.

20951943|a|Cyclin D1 elicits transcriptional effects through inactivation of the retinoblastoma protein and direct association with transcriptional regulators. The current work reveals a molecular relationship between cyclin D1/CDK4 kinase and protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5), an enzyme associated with histone methylation and transcriptional repression. Primary tumors of a mouse lymphoma model exhibit increased PRMT5 methyltransferase activity and histone arginine methylation. Analyses demonstrate that MEP50, a PRMT5 coregulatory factor, is a CDK4 substrate, and phosphorylation increases PRMT5/MEP50 activity. Increased PRMT5 activity mediates key events associated with cyclin D1-dependent neoplastic growth, including CUL4 repression, CDT1 overexpression, and DNA rereplication. Importantly, human cancers harboring mutations in Fbx4, the cyclin D1 E3 ligase, exhibit nuclear cyclin D1 accumulation and increased PRMT5 activity.

20932480|a|Signal-induced alternative splicing of the CD45 gene in human T cells is essential for proper immune function. Skipping of the CD45 variable exons is controlled, in large part, by the recruitment of PSF to the pre-mRNA substrate upon T cell activation; however, the signaling cascade leading to exon exclusion has remained elusive. Here we demonstrate that in resting T cells PSF is directly phosphorylated by GSK3, thus promoting interaction of PSF with TRAP150, which prevents PSF from binding CD45 pre-mRNA. Upon T cell activation, reduced GSK3 activity leads to reduced PSF phosphorylation, releasing PSF from TRAP150 and allowing it to bind CD45 splicing regulatory elements and repress exon inclusion. Our data place two players, GSK3 and TRAP150, in the complex network that regulates CD45 alternative splicing and demonstrate a paradigm for signal transduction from the cell surface to the RNA processing machinery through the multifunctional protein PSF.

21041660|a|Defining the links between cell division and DNA replication is essential for understanding normal cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis. In this report we explore the effect of phosphorylation of cell division cycle 6 (Cdc6), a DNA replication initiation factor, by polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) on the regulation of chromosomal segregation. In mitosis, the phosphorylation of Cdc6 was highly increased, in correlation with the level of Plk1, and conversely, Cdc6 is hypophosphorylated in Plk1-depleted cells, although cyclin A- and cyclin B1-dependent kinases are active. Binding between Cdc6 and Plk1 occurs through the polo-box domain of Plk1, and Cdc6 is phosphorylated by Plk1 on T37. Immunohistochemistry studies reveal that Cdc6 and Plk1 colocalize to the central spindle in anaphase. Expression of T37V mutant of Cdc6 (Cdc6-TV) induces binucleated cells and incompletely separated nuclei. Wild-type Cdc6 but not Cdc6-TV binds cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1). Expression of wild-type Plk1 but not kinase-defective mutant promotes the binding of Cdc6 to Cdk1. Cells expressing wild-type Cdc6 display lower Cdk1 activity and higher separase activity than cells expressing Cdc6-TV. These results suggest that Plk1-mediated phosphorylation of Cdc6 promotes the interaction of Cdc6 and Cdk1, leading to the attenuation of Cdk1 activity, release of separase, and subsequent anaphase progression.

27112597|a|Sister chromatid cohesion, formed by the cohesin protein complex, is essential for chromosome segregation. In order for cohesion to be established, the cohesin subunit SMC3 needs to be acetylated by a homolog of the ESCO1/Eco1 acetyltransferases, the enzymatic mechanism of which has remained unknown. Here we report the crystal structure of the ESCO1 acetyltransferase domain in complex with acetyl-coenzyme A, and show by SAXS that ESCO1 is a dimer in solution. The structure reveals an active site that lacks a potential catalytic base side chain. However, mutation of glutamate 789, a surface residue that is close to the automodification target lysine 803, strongly reduces autoacetylation of ESCO1. Moreover, budding yeast Smc3 mutated at the conserved residue D114, adjacent to the cohesion-activating acetylation site K112,K113, cannot be acetylated in vivo. This indicates that ESCO1 controls cohesion through substrate-assisted catalysis. Thus, this study discloses a key mechanism for cohesion establishment.

14993289|a|Np95 is an important determinant in cell cycle progression. Its expression is tightly regulated and becomes detectable shortly before the entry of cells into S phase. Accordingly, Np95 is absolutely required for the G1/S transition. Its continued expression throughout the S/G2/M phases further suggests additional roles. Indeed, Np95 has been implicated in DNA damage response. Here, we show that Np95 is tightly bound to chromatin in vivo and that it binds to histones in vivo and in vitro. The binding to histones is direct and shows a remarkable preference for histone H3 and its N-terminal tail. A novel protein domain, the SRA-YDG domain, contained in Np95 is indispensable both for the interaction with histones and for chromatin binding in vivo. Np95 contains a RING finger. We show that this domain confers E3 ubiquitin ligase activity on Np95, which is specific for core histones, in vitro. Finally, Np95 shows specific E3 activity for histone H3 when the endogenous core octamer, coimmunoprecipitating with Np95, is used as a substrate. Histone ubiquitination is an important determinant in the regulation of chromatin structure and gene transcription. Thus, the demonstration that Np95 is a chromatin-associated ubiquitin ligase suggests possible molecular mechanisms for its action as a cell cycle regulator.

14744935|a|The tumor suppressor p53, a sensor of multiple forms of cellular stress, is regulated by post-translational mechanisms to induce cell-cycle arrest, senescence, or apoptosis. We demonstrate that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inhibits p53-mediated apoptosis. The mechanism of inhibition involves the increased cytoplasmic localization of p53 due to phosphorylation at serine 315 and serine 376, which is mediated by glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3beta). ER stress induces GSK-3beta binding to p53 in the nucleus and enhances the cytoplasmic localization of the tumor suppressor. Inhibition of apoptosis caused by ER stress requires GSK-3beta and does not occur in cells expressing p53 with mutation(s) of serine 315 and/or serine 376 to alanine(s). As a result of the increased cytoplasmic localization, ER stress prevents p53 stabilization and p53-mediated apoptosis upon DNA damage. It is concluded that inactivation of p53 is a protective mechanism utilized by cells to adapt to ER stress.

14993658|a|The hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural NS5A protein has been shown to associate with a variety of cellular signalling proteins. Of particular interest is the observation that a highly conserved C-terminal polyproline motif in NS5A was able to interact with the Src-homology 3 (SH3) domains of the adaptor protein Grb2. As it has previously been shown that specific polyproline motifs can interact with a range of SH3 domains, we investigated whether NS5A was capable of interacting with other SH3 domain-containing proteins. We show here that NS5A interacts with the SH3 domains of members of the Src family of tyrosine kinases: a combination of in vitro binding assays and co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed an interaction between NS5A and Hck, Lck, Lyn and Fyn, but interestingly not Src itself. Mutational analysis confirmed that the polyproline motif responsible for binding to Grb2 also bound to the SH3 domains of Hck, Lck, Lyn and Fyn. Furthermore, a previously unidentified polyproline motif, adjacent to the first motif, was also able to mediate binding to the SH3 domain of Lyn. Using transient transfections and Huh-7 cells harbouring a persistently replicating subgenomic HCV replicon we demonstrate that NS5A bound to native Src-family kinases in vivo and differentially modulated kinase activity, inhibiting Hck, Lck and Lyn but activating Fyn. Lastly, we show that signalling pathways controlled by Src-family kinases are modulated in replicon cells. We conclude that the interactions between NS5A and Src-family kinases are physiologically relevant and may play a role in either virus replication or pathogenesis.

14755250|a|RING-finger proteins play crucial roles in ubiquitination events involved in diverse cellular processes including signal transduction, differentiation and apoptosis. Most of the RING-finger proteins have E3-ubiquitin ligase activity. RNF11 is a small RING-finger protein and harbors a RING-H2 domain and a PY motif that could facilitate protein:protein interaction(s) involved in oncogenesis. To isolate RNF11 protein partners and determine its role in normal and cancer cells, we performed yeast two-hybrid screening. Among 18 in-frame positive clones, three were found to be ZBRK1, Eps15 and AMSH (associated molecule with the SH3 domain of STAM). ZBRK1 is a KRAB domain containing Zinc-finger protein and is known to repress target gene transcription in a BRCA1-dependent manner. Eps15 is monoubiquitinated and is part of an essential complex involved in the endocytosis of plasma membrane receptors via the clathrin-mediated internalization pathway. Recent studies have shown that AMSH protein is involved in BMP/TGF-beta signaling pathway by binding to Smad6 and Smad7. The association of RNF11 with these binding partners suggests that it would be involved in biological processes such as gene transcription, BMP/TGF-beta signaling and ubiquitination-associated events. Previously, we have shown that RNF11 interacts with the HECT-type E3 ligases AIP4 and Smurf2. Here, we show that RNF11 binds to AMSH in mammalian cells and that this interaction is independent of the RNF11 RING-finger domain and the PY motif. Our results also demonstrate that AMSH is ubiquitinated by Smurf2 E3 ligase in the presence of RNF11 and that a consequent reduction in its steady-state level requires both RNF11 and Smurf2. RNF11 therefore recruits AMSH to Smurf2 for ubiquitination, leading to its degradation by the 26S proteasome. The potential functions of RNF11-mediated degradation of AMSH in breast cancer are discussed.

9418872|a|We have recently shown that protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) associates with the docking protein p130Cas in 3Y1 rat fibroblasts. This interaction is mediated by a proline-rich sequence on PTP1B and the SH3 domain on p130Cas. Expression of wild-type PTP1B (WT-PTP1B), but not a catalytically competent, proline-to-alanine point mutant that cannot bind p130Cas (PA-PTP1B), causes substantial tyrosine dephosphorylation of p130Cas (F. Liu, D. E. Hill, and J. Chernoff, J. Biol. Chem. 271:31290-31295, 1996). Here we demonstrate that WT-, but not PA-PTP1B, inhibits transformation of rat 3Y1 fibroblasts by v-crk, -src, and -ras, but not by v-raf. These effects on transformation correlate with the phosphorylation status of p130Cas and two proteins that are associated with p130Cas, Paxillin and Fak. Expression of WT-PTP1B reduces formation of p130Cas-Crk complexes and inhibits mitogen-activated protein kinase activation by Src and Crk. These data show that transformation suppression by PTP1B requires a functional SH3 ligand and suggest that p130Cas may represent an important physiological target of PTP1B in cells.

9566916|a|The p210 bcr-abl protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) appears to be directly responsible for the initial manifestations of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). In contrast to the extensive characterization of the PTK and its effects on cell function, relatively little is known about the nature of the protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) that may modulate p210 bcr-abl-induced signalling. In this study, we have demonstrated that expression of PTP1B is enhanced specifically in various cells expressing p210 bcr-abl, including a cell line derived from a patient with CML. This effect on expression of PTP1B required the kinase activity of p210 bcr-abl and occurred rapidly, concomitant with maximal activation of a temperature-sensitive mutant of the PTK. The effect is apparently specific for PTP1B since, among several PTPs tested, we detected no change in the levels of TCPTP, the closest relative of PTP1B. We have developed a strategy for identification of physiological substrates of individual PTPs which utilizes substrate-trapping mutant forms of the enzymes that retain the ability to bind to substrate but fail to catalyze efficient dephosphorylation. We have observed association between a substrate-trapping mutant of PTP1B (PTP1B-D181A) and p210 bcr-abl, but not v-Abl, in a cellular context. Consistent with the trapping data, we observed dephosphorylation of p210 bcr-abl, but not v-Abl, by PTP1B in vivo. We have demonstrated that PTP1B inhibited binding of the adapter protein Grb2 to p210 bcr-abl and suppressed p210 bcr-abl-induced transcriptional activation that is dependent on Ras. These results illustrate selectivity in the effects of PTPs in a cellular context and suggest that PTP1B may function as a specific, negative regulator of p210 bcr-abl signalling in vivo.

8940099|a|The transcription factor NF-kappaB is retained in the cytoplasm by its interaction with the inhibitory subunit known as IkappaB. Signal-induced serine phosphorylation and subsequent ubiquitination of IkappaBalpha target it for degradation by the 26 S proteasome. Recently, pervanadate, a protein-tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, was shown to block the degradation of IkappaBalpha, thus inhibiting NF-kappaB activation. We investigated the mechanism by which pervanadate inhibits the degradation of IkappaBalpha. Western blot analysis of IkappaBalpha from tumor necrosis factor-treated cells revealed a slower migrating IkappaBalpha species that was subsequently degraded. However, pervanadate-treated cells also revealed a slower migrating species of IkappaBalpha that appeared in a time- and dose-dependent manner and was not degraded by tumor necrosis factor. The slower migrating species of IkappaBalpha from pervanadate-treated cells was tyrosine-phosphorylated as revealed by cross-reactivity with anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies, by the ability of the specific tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B to dephosphorylate it, and by phosphoamino acid analysis of IkappaBalpha immunoprecipitated from 32P-labeled cells. By site-specific mutagenesis and deletion analysis, we identified Tyr-42 on IkappaBalpha as the phosphoacceptor site. Furthermore, in an in vitro reconstitution system, tyrosine-phosphorylated IkappaBalpha was protected from degradation. Our results demonstrate that inducible phosphorylation and degradation of IkappaBalpha are negatively regulated by phosphorylation at Tyr-42, thus preventing NF-kappaB activation.

9150141|a|Stimulation of cells with inducers of NF-kappaB such as LPS and IL-1 leads to the degradation of IkappaB-alpha and IkappaB-beta proteins and translocation of NF-kappaB to the nucleus. We now demonstrate that, besides the physical partitioning of inactive NF-kappaB to the cytosol, the transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB is regulated through phosphorylation of NF-kappaB p65 by protein kinase A (PKA). The catalytic subunit of PKA (PKAc) is maintained in an inactive state through association with IkappaB-alpha or IkappaB-beta in an NF-kappaB-IkappaB-PKAc complex. Signals that cause the degradation of IkappaB result in activation of PKAc in a cAMP-independent manner and the subsequent phosphorylation of p65. Therefore, this pathway represents a novel mechanism for the cAMP-independent activation of PKA and the regulation of NF-kappaB activity.

7809103|a|Human positive cofactor 4 (PC4) mediates activator-dependent transcription by RNA polymerase II, apparently through interactions with transcriptional activators and the basal transcription machinery. We report here that PC4 function is modulated by in vivo phosphorylation. Protein-protein interaction studies and in vitro transcription assays demonstrate that only the nonphosphorylated form of PC4 is functionally active. Although recombinant PC4 can be phosphorylated by casein kinase II and protein kinase C in vitro, mutational and mass spectrometric analyses suggest that the in vivo hyperphosphorylation of PC4 is mediated mainly by casein kinase II and restricted to an N-terminal serine-rich region. These observations provide one example of a transcriptional cofactor that is negatively regulated by casein kinase II phosphorylation.

9600099|a|We have cloned a soluble chicken protein tyrosine phosphatase, named CPTP1, from the cDNA library of chicken intestine. The CPTP1 showed 92% sequence identity to the corresponding 321 amino acid residues of human PTP1B (HPTP1B). CPTP1 lacked 13 amino acids of the N-terminal region compared with HPTP1B, while the C-terminal 48 amino acid sequence of this protein was distinct from those of other PTPs. In vitro phosphorylation and phosphoamino acid analysis showed that both CPTP1 and HPTP1B were phosphorylated on serine and threonine residues near their N-terminus by casein kinase II (CKII). Furthermore, phosphorylation of CPTP1 by CKII resulted in an inhibition of its phosphatase activity in vitro. Interestingly, both CPTP1 and HPTP1B were also tyrosine-phosphorylated near their N-terminus by p60c-src. When we examined the vanadate effect, in the absence of vanadate, the tyrosine-phosphorylated CPTP1 by p60c-src was autodephosphorylated by its own phosphatase activity. These results suggest that both CPTP1 and HPTP1B might play an important role in CKII- and p60c-src-induced signal transduction cascades.

9431994|a|The vaccinia virus K3L gene product, pK3, binds to the dsRNA-activated protein kinase, PKR, reducing its ability to interact with and phosphorylate eIF2alpha. On the basis of this characteristic and the homology of pK3 to the N-terminus of eIF2alpha, several laboratories have utilized pK3 to investigate the molecular determinants that specify substrate recognition by PKR. The data presented here demonstrate that the natural substrate, eIF2alpha, also binds to PKR in vitro and interacts with the same or an overlapping domain within PKR. A truncated form of eIF2alpha, representing the N-terminal 123 amino acids and containing the regions of homology to pK3, retains the ability to bind PKR. pK3, eIF2alpha, and the truncated form of eIF2alpha all bind to the C-terminus of PKR containing the catalytic domain, but not to the regulatory N-terminus. Variants of pK3 and eIF2alpha, des-(75-78)-K3L (pK3deltaGYID), and des-(80-83)-eIF2alpha (eIF2alphadeltaGYID), from which the conserved amino acids GYID have been deleted, exhibit a decreased ability to interact with PKR. Similarly, the in vitro binding of pK3, eIF2alpha, and the truncated form of eIF2alpha to PKR can be competed with purified pK3 but not with pK3deltaGYID. In addition, the deletion of GYID from eIF2alpha significantly reduces its ability to be phosphorylated by PKR, demonstrating that PKR recognizes its substrate, at least in part through interaction with sequences remote from the phosphorylation site. In summary, we have shown that the region within PKR that interacts with the pseudosubstrate, pK3, is the same region that interacts with the authentic substrate, eIF2alpha. In addition, we have shown that the N-terminal 123 amino acids of eIF2alpha contains structural elements necessary for recognition by PKR. The results pinpoint the GYID motif, shared between pK3 and eIF2alpha and distant from the phosphorylation site, as being important for the interaction of eIF2alpha with PKR, as well as its phosphorylation.

8663994|a|We have characterized the phosphorylation of the glutamate receptor subunit GluR1, using biochemical and electrophysiological techniques. GluR1 is phosphorylated on multiple sites that are all located on the C-terminus of the protein. Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase specifically phosphorylates SER-845 of GluR1 in transfected HEK cells and in neurons in culture. Phosphorylation of this residue results in a 40% potentiation of the peak current through GluR1 homomeric channels. In addition, protein kinase C specifically phosphorylates Ser-831 of GluR1 in HEK-293 cells and in cultured neurons. These results are consistent with the recently proposed transmembrane topology models of glutamate receptors, in which the C-terminus is intracellular. In addition, the modulation of GluR1 by PKA phosphorylation of Ser-845 suggests that phosphorylation of this residue may underlie the PKA-induced potentiation of AMPA receptors in neurons.

8114715|a|The phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of proteins on tyrosyl residues are key regulatory mechanisms in T-cell signal transduction and are controlled by the opposing activities of protein tyrosine kinases and phosphotyrosyl phosphatases (PTPs). In T cells, several nontransmembrane protein tyrosine kinases are associated with receptors; for example, Lck is bound to the coreceptors CD4 and CD8 and becomes activated upon their stimulation. In comparison, little is known about the role of nontransmembrane PTPs in early T-cell signaling. SH-PTP1 (PTP1C, HCP, SHP) is a nontransmembrane PTP expressed primarily in hematopoietic cells, including T cells. We have found that SH-PTP1 is basally phosphorylated on serine in resting T cells. Upon stimulation of CD4 or CD8 either in a T-cell hybridoma cell line or in primary thymocytes, SH-PTP1 becomes tyrosyl phosphorylated. Moreover, SH-PTP1 is constitutively phosphorylated on tyrosine in the Lck-overexpressing lymphoma cell line LSTRA. SH-PTP1 is also a good substrate for recombinant Lck in vitro. Comparisons of the tryptic phosphopeptide maps of wild-type SH-PTP1 and deletion and point mutations establish that the two sites (Y-536 and Y-564) which are directly phosphorylated by Lck in vitro are also phosphorylated in vivo in LSTRA cells. One of these sites (Y-564) is phosphorylated in T cells in response to Lck activation. We conclude that SH-PTP1 undergoes Lck-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation in T cells and likely plays a role in early T-cell signaling.

7782287|a|Mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase (alpha 2 beta 2) (E1) is regulated by phosphorylation-dephosphorylation, catalyzed by the E1-kinase and the phospho-E1-phosphatase. Using site-directed mutagenesis of the three phosphorylation sites (sites 1, 2, and 3) on E1 alpha, several human E1 mutants were made with single, double, and triple mutations by changing Ser to Ala. Mutation at site 1 but not at sites 2 and/or 3 decreased E1 specific activity and also increased Km values for thiamin pyrophosphate and pyruvate. Sites 1, 2, and 3 in the E1 mutants were phosphorylated either individually or in the presence of the other sites by the dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase-protein X-E1 kinase indicating a site-independent mechanism of phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of each site resulted in complete inactivation of the E1. However, the rates of phosphorylation and inactivation were site-specific. Sites 1, 2, and 3 were dephosphorylated either individually or in the presence of the other sites by the phospho-E1-phosphatase resulting in complete reactivation of the E1. The rates of dephosphorylation and reactivation were similar for sites 1, 2, and 3, indicating a random dephosphorylation mechanism.

9355745|a|We used a substrate-trapping technique to search for substrates of protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) 1B. A catalytically inactive form of this enzyme forms a stable, phosphotyrosine-dependent complex with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) both in vitro and in cells. PTP1B also interacts with activated platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) but not with colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF-1R). After binding to EGFR, PTP1B becomes tyrosine-phosphorylated at Tyr-66, a site that conforms to the consensus binding sequence for the Src homology 2 (SH2) domains of the adapter protein Grb2. This tyrosine phosphorylation is correlated with a 3-fold increase in PTP catalytic activity. These findings suggest that PTP1B selectively regulates specific activated receptor protein tyrosine kinases (RPTKs) in vivo and might itself be regulated by such receptors.

8621392|a|Photoaffinity labeling has been used to identify amino acids involved in recognition of protein substrates by the protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP1. The photoactive amino acid p-benzoylphenylalanine (Bpa) was incorporated into a phosphotyrosine-containing peptide derived from epidermal growth factor autophosphorylation site Tyr992 (EGFR988 998). This peptide photoinactivated PTP1 in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Three lines of evidence indicate that the interaction between PTP1 and the photoaffinity label was specific: 1) photoinactivation was inhibited in the presence of a non-Bpa-containing peptide from EGFR Tyr992 in molar excess. 2) The photoaffinity label-containing phosphopeptide was rapidly dephosphorylated by PTP1 with kinetic constants similar to those of the non-Bpa-containing peptide under identical conditions. 3) After complete photoinactivation, the level of incorporation of radioactive photoaffinity label into PTP1 was approximately 0.9 mol of label/mol of enzyme, consistent with a 1:1 stoichiometry of photolabeling. Radiolabeled peptide was used to identify sites of cross-linking to PTP1. Bpa peptide-PTP1 was digested with trypsin, and radioactive fragments were purified by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and analyzed by Edman sequencing. In two parallel experiments which were analyzed using different HPLC columns, a site in the alpha2 region of PTP1, most likely Ile23, was labeled by the Tyr992-derived peptide. The results are discussed in light of the crystal structure of human PTP1B and suggest that an additional mode of substrate recognition must exist for PTP1 catalysis.

8836115|a|In mammalian cells vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) is localized to focal adhesions and areas of dynamic membrane activity where it is thought to have a role in actinfilament assembly. The proteins responsible for recruiting VASP to these sites within the cell are not known. The bacterial protein ActA binds VASP via a proline-rich motif that is very similar to a sequence in the proline-rich region of the focal-adhesion protein vinculin. We have examined the ability of VASP, synthesized using an in vitro transcription/translation system, to bind to a series of vinculin peptides expressed as glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins, and have shown that it binds specifically to the proline-rich region in vinculin. Using immobilized peptides corresponding to the two proline-rich motifs within this domain, the VASP-binding site was localized to proline-rich motif-l (residues 839-850). Binding to this motif was not affected by the phosphorylation state of VASP. The C-terminal region of VASP, which is known to be important in targeting VASP to focal adhesions, was shown to be required for binding. These results identify vinculin as a VASP-binding protein likely to be important in recruiting VASP to focal adhesions and the cell membrane.

9143277|a|Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the major cause of non-A non-B hepatitis and a leading cause of liver dysfunction worldwide. While the current therapy for chronic HCV infection is parenteral administration of type 1 interferon (IFN), only a fraction of HCV-infected individuals completely respond to treatment. Previous studies have correlated the IFN sensitivity of strain HCV-1b with mutations within a discrete region of the viral nonstructural 5A protein (NS5A), termed the interferon sensitivity determining region (ISDR), suggesting that NS5A may contribute to the IFN-resistant phenotype of HCV. To determine the importance of HCV NS5A and the NS5A ISDR in mediating HCV IFN resistance, we tested whether the NS5A protein could regulate the IFN-induced protein kinase, PKR, a mediator of IFN-induced antiviral resistance and a target of viral and cellular inhibitors. Using multiple approaches, including biochemical, transfection, and yeast genetics analyses, we can now report that NS5A represses PKR through a direct interaction with the protein kinase catalytic domain and that both PKR repression and interaction requires the ISDR. Thus, inactivation of PKR may be one mechanism by which HCV avoids the antiviral effects of IFN. Finally the inhibition of the PKR protein kinase, by NS5A is the first described function for this HCV protein.

8756624|a|The cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor p21 is induced by the tumor suppressor p53 and is required for the G1-S block in cells with DNA damage. We report that there are two copies of a cyclin-binding motif in p21, Cy1 and Cy2, which interact with the cyclins independently of Cdk2. The cyclin-binding motifs of p21 are required for optimum inhibition of cyclin-Cdk kinases in vitro and for growth suppression in vivo. Peptides containing only the Cy1 or Cy2 motif partially inhibit cyclin-Cdk kinase activity in vitro and DNA replication in Xenopus egg extracts. A monoclonal antibody which recognizes the Cy1 site of p21 specifically disrupts the association of p21 with cyclin E-Cdk2 and with cyclin D1-Cdk4 in cell extracts. Taken together, these observations suggest that the cyclin-binding motif of p21 is important for kinase inhibition and for formation of p21-cyclin-Cdk complexes in the cell. Finally, we show that the cyclin-Cdk complex is partially active if associated with only the cyclin-binding motif of p21, providing an explanation for how p21 is found associated with active cyclin-Cdk complexes in vivo. The Cy sequences may be general motifs used by Cdk inhibitors or substrates to interact with the cyclin in a cyclin-Cdk complex.

9144171|a|Human RIN1 was first characterized as a RAS binding protein based on the properties of its carboxyl-terminal domain. We now show that full-length RIN1 interacts with activated RAS in mammalian cells and defines a minimum region of 434 aa required for efficient RAS binding. RIN1 interacts with the "effector domain" of RAS and employs some RAS determinants that are common to, and others that are distinct from, those required for the binding of RAF1, a known RAS effector. The same domain of RIN1 that binds RAS also interacts with 14-3-3 proteins, extending the similarity between RIN1 and other RAS effectors. When expressed in mammalian cells, the RAS binding domain of RIN1 can act as a dominant negative signal transduction blocker. The amino-terminal domain of RIN1 contains a proline-rich sequence similar to consensus Src homology 3 (SH3) binding regions. This RIN1 sequence shows preferential binding to the ABL-SH3 domain in vitro. Moreover, the amino-terminal domain of RIN1 directly associates with, and is tyrosine phosphorylated by, c-ABL. In addition, RIN1 encodes a functional SH2 domain that has the potential to activate downstream signals. These data suggest that RIN1 is able to mediate multiple signals. A differential pattern of expression and alternate splicing indicate several levels of RIN1 regulation.

9235916|a|We have identified a novel p110 isoform of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase from human leukocytes that we have termed p110delta. In addition, we have independently isolated p110delta from a mouse embryo library on the basis of its ability to interact with Ha-RasV12 in the yeast two-hybrid system. This unique isoform contains all of the conserved structural features characteristic of the p110 family. Recombinant p110delta phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol and coimmunoprecipitates with p85. However, in contrast to previously described p110 subunits, p110delta is expressed in a tissue-restricted fashion; it is expressed at high levels in lymphocytes and lymphoid tissues and may therefore play a role in phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-mediated signaling in the immune system.

9139733|a|The interaction between protein kinase C-delta and its neuronal substrate, GAP-43, was studied. Two forms of protein kinase C-delta were isolated from COS cells and characterized by differences in gel mobility, GAP-43 binding, and specific GAP-43 and histone kinase activities. A slow migrating, low specific activity form of protein kinase C-delta bound directly to immobilized GAP-43. Binding was abolished in the presence of EGTA, suggesting Ca2+ dependence of the interaction. The free catalytic domain of protein kinase C-delta did not bind GAP-43, suggesting the existence of a binding site in the regulatory domain. Glutathione S-transferase-protein kinase C-delta regulatory domain fusion proteins were generated and tested for binding to GAP-43. The V0/C2-like amino-terminal domain was defined as the GAP-43-binding site. GAP-43 binding to this region is inhibited by EGTA and regulated at Ca2+ levels between 10(-7) and 10(-6) M. The interaction between protein kinase C-delta and GAP-43 was studied in intact cells by coexpression of the two proteins in human embryonic kidney cells followed by immunoprecipitation. Complex formation occurred only after treatment of the cells with the Ca2+ ionophore ionomycin, indicating that elevation of intracellular Ca2+ is required for interaction in vivo. It is concluded that protein kinase C-delta interacts with GAP-43 through the V0/C2-like domain, outside the catalytic site, and that this interaction is modulated by intracellular Ca2+.

9520446|a|Activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB by inflammatory cytokines involves the successive action of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK) and two IkappaB kinases, IKK-alpha and IKK-beta. Here we show that NIK preferentially phosphorylates IKK-alpha over IKK-beta, leading to the activation of IKK-alpha kinase activity. This phosphorylation of IKK-alpha occurs specifically on Ser-176 in the activation loop between kinase subdomains VII and VIII. A mutant form of IKK-alpha containing alanine at residue 176 cannot be phosphorylated or activated by NIK and acts as a dominant negative inhibitor of interleukin 1- and tumor necrosis factor-induced NF-kappaB activation. Conversely, a mutant form of IKK-alpha containing glutamic acid at residue 176 is constitutively active. Thus, the phosphorylation of IKK-alpha on Ser-176 by NIK may be required for cytokine-mediated NF-kappaB activation.

9001210|a|Entry into mitosis requires the activity of the Cdc2 kinase. Cdc2 associates with the B-type cyclins, and the Cdc2-cyclin B heterodimer is in turn regulated by phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of threonine 161 is required for the Cdc2-cyclin B complex to be catalytically active, whereas phosphorylation of threonine 14 and tyrosine 15 is inhibitory. Human kinases that catalyze the phosphorylation of threonine 161 and tyrosine 15 have been identified. Here we report the isolation of a novel human cDNA encoding a dual-specificity protein kinase (designated Myt1Hu) that preferentially phosphorylates Cdc2 on threonine 14 in a cyclin-dependent manner. Myt1Hu is 46% identical to Myt1Xe, a kinase recently characterized from Xenopus laevis. Myt1Hu localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex in HeLa cells. A stretch of hydrophobic and uncharged amino acids located outside the catalytic domain of Myt1Hu is the likely membrane-targeting domain, as its deletion results in the localization of Myt1Hu primarily to the nucleus.

8521818|a|It is proposed that the CDK7-cyclin H complex functions in cell cycle progression, basal transcription and DNA repair. Here we report that in vitro reconstitution of an active CDK7-cyclin H complex requires stoichiometric amounts of a novel 36 kDa assembly factor termed MAT1 (ménage à trois 1). Sequencing of MAT1 reveals a putative zinc binding motif (a C3HC4 RING finger) in the N-terminus; however, this domain is not required for ternary complex formation with CDK7-cyclin H. MAT1 is associated with nuclear CDK7-cyclin H at all stages of the cell cycle in vivo. Ternary complexes of CDK7, cyclin H and MAT1 display kinase activity towards substrates mimicking both the T-loop in CDKs and the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, regardless of whether they are immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells or reconstituted in a reticulocyte lysate. MAT1 constitutes the first example of an assembly factor that appears to be essential for the formation of an active CDK-cyclin complex.

9012831|a|Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is essential for B cell activation, but downstream targets of Btk have not been defined. We now describe a protein, BAP-135, that is associated with Btk in B cells and is a substrate for phosphorylation by Btk. BAP-135, which exhibits no detectable homology to known proteins, contains six occurrences of a hitherto undescribed amino acid repeat and two motifs, similar to the Src autophosphorylation site, that represent potential targets for tyrosine phosphorylation. The pleckstrin homology domain of Btk comprises the principal site of BAP-135 binding. Btk-dependent phosphorylation of BAP-135 is abolished by mutations that impair activation of Btk by Src-related kinases. Btk and BAP-135 exist in a complex before B cell antigen receptor (BCR) engagement; in response to BCR crosslinking, BAP-135 is transiently phosphorylated on tyrosine. Taken together, these observations suggest that BAP-135 may reside downstream of Btk in a signaling pathway originating at the BCR.

7759517|a|We have identified two components of a new protein kinase signaling cascade, MAPK/ERK kinase 5 (MEK5) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5). The MEK5 cDNA was isolated by degenerate PCR and encodes a 444-amino acid protein, which has approximately 40% identity to known MEKs. ERK5 was identified by a specific interaction with the MEK5 mutants S311A/T315A and K195M in the yeast two-hybrid system. The proteins were found to interact in an in vitro binding assay as well. ERK5 did not interact with MEK1 or MEK2. ERK5 is predicted to contain 815 amino acids and is approximately twice the size of all known ERKs. The C terminus of ERK5 has sequences which suggest that it may be targeted to the cytoskeleton. Sequences located in the N terminus of MEK5 may be important in coupling GTPase signaling molecules to the MEK5 protein kinase cascade. Both MEK5 and ERK5 are expressed in many adult tissue and are abundant in heart and skeletal muscle. A recombinant GST-ERK5 kinase domain displays autophosphorylation on Ser/Thr and Tyr residues.

9632734|a|The human ST5 gene encodes three proteins with predicted molecular masses of 126, 82, and 70 kDa. These widely expressed proteins share a C-terminal region that bears significant sequence homology to a group of GDP/GTP exchange proteins for the Rab3 family of small GTP binding proteins. The N-terminal region of the largest ST5 protein, p126, contains two proline-rich sequences, PR1 and PR2, with consensus motifs similar to Src homology 3 (SH3) binding regions and to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation sites. Based on these properties, we sought to investigate the activity of ST5 proteins in signal transduction pathways. In vitro, p126 displayed preferential binding to c-Abl SH3, as compared with other SH3 domains. This interaction was mediated by the PR2 sequence. In vivo, expression of p126, but not p82 or p70, activated MAPK/ERK2 in response to EGF in COS-7 cells. Expression of c-Abl with p126 greatly enhanced this activity. Deletion of PR1 blocked the ability of p126 to activate ERK2. Deletion of PR2 did not affect the basal activity, but blocked the stimulatory effect of c-Abl. Whereas p82 expression had no effect on ERK2 activation by p126, p70 completely abrogated this activity. These observations suggest that ST5 can function as a signaling protein and can provide a link between c-Abl and ERK2.

21983831|a|Protein kinase C-θ (PKC-θ) is required for activation of the transcription factor NF-κB induced by signaling via the T cell antigen receptor (TCR); however, the direct activator of PKC-θ is unknown. We report that the kinase GLK (MAP4K3) directly activated PKC-θ during TCR signaling. TCR signaling activated GLK by inducing its direct interaction with the upstream adaptor SLP-76. GLK-deficient mice had impaired immune responses and were resistant to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Consistent with that, people with systemic lupus erythematosus had considerable enhanced GLK expression and activation of PKC-θ and the kinase IKK in T cells, and the frequency of GLK-overexpressing T cells was directly correlated with disease severity. Thus, GLK is a direct activator of PKC-θ, and activation of GLK-PKC-θ-IKK could be used as new diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets for systemic lupus erythematosus.

21822257|a|Interleukin 17 (IL-17) is critical in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. Here we report that Act1, the key adaptor for the IL-17 receptor (IL-7R), formed a complex with the inducible kinase IKKi after stimulation with IL-17. Through the use of IKKi-deficient mice, we found that IKKi was required for IL-17-induced expression of genes encoding inflammatory molecules in primary airway epithelial cells, neutrophilia and pulmonary inflammation. IKKi deficiency abolished IL-17-induced formation of the complex of Act1 and the adaptors TRAF2 and TRAF5, activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and mRNA stability, whereas the Act1-TRAF6-transcription factor NF-κB axis was retained. IKKi was required for IL-17-induced phosphorylation of Act1 on Ser311, adjacent to a putative TRAF-binding motif. Substitution of the serine at position 311 with alanine impaired the IL-17-mediated Act1-TRAF2-TRAF5 interaction and gene expression. Thus, IKKi is a kinase newly identified as modulating IL-17 signaling through its effect on Act1 phosphorylation and consequent function.

21765415|a|In response to stimulation with proinflammatory cytokines, the deubiquitinase A20 inducibly interacts with the regulatory molecules TAX1BP1, Itch and RNF11 to form the A20 ubiquitin-editing complex. However, the molecular signal that coordinates the assembly of this complex has remained elusive. Here we demonstrate that TAX1BP1 was inducibly phosphorylated on Ser593 and Ser624 in response to proinflammatory stimuli. The kinase IKKα, but not IKKβ, was required for phosphorylation of TAX1BP1 and directly phosphorylated TAX1BP1 in response to stimulation with tumor necrosis factor (TNF) or interleukin 1 (IL-1). TAX1BP1 phosphorylation was pivotal for cytokine-dependent interactions among TAX1BP1, A20, Itch and RNF11 and downregulation of signaling by the transcription factor NF-κB. IKKα therefore serves a key role in the negative feedback of NF-κB canonical signaling by orchestrating assembly of the A20 ubiquitin-editing complex to limit inflammatory gene activation.

21986944|a|Male germ cell-associated kinase (MAK), a direct transcriptional target of androgen receptor (AR), is a co-activator of AR. In this study, we determined the activating mechanism of MAK and identified a previously unknown AR-independent role of MAK in mitosis. We found that MAK kinase activity requires dual phosphorylation of the conserved TDY motif and that the phosphorylation is dynamic during cell cycle. MAK associates with CDH1 (FZR1, fizzy/cell division cycle 20 related 1) and phosphorylates CDH1 at sites phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinases. When MAK is overexpressed, the binding of CDH1 to anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome decreased, resulting in an attenuation of anaphase-promoting complex/C ubiquitin ligase activity and the consequential stabilization of the CDH1 targets such as Aurora kinase A and Polo-like kinase 1. As such, overexpression of MAK leads to mitotic defects such as centrosome amplification and lagging chromosomes. Our immunohistochemistry result showed that MAK is overexpressed in prostate tumor tissues, suggesting a role of MAK in prostate carcinogenesis. Taken with our previous results, our data implicate MAK in both AR activation and chromosomal instability, acting in both early and late prostate cancer development.

21952639|a|In biological networks, a small number of "hub" proteins play critical roles in the network integrity and functions. The cell cycle network orchestrates versatile cellular functions through interactions between many signaling modules, whose defects impair diverse cellular processes, often leading to cancer. However, the network architecture and molecular basis that ensure proper coordination between distinct modules are unclear. Here, we show that the ubiquitin ligase NIRF (also known as UHRF2), which induces G1 arrest, interacts with multiple cell cycle proteins including cyclins (A2, B1, D1 and E1), p53 and pRB, and ubiquitinates cyclins D1 and E1. Consistent with its versatility, a bioinformatic network analysis demonstrated that NIRF is an intermodular hub protein that is responsible for the coordination of multiple network modules. Notably, intermodular hubs are frequently associated with oncogenesis. Indeed, we detected loss of heterozygosity of the NIRF gene in several kinds of tumors. When a cancer outlier profile analysis was applied to the Oncomine database, loss of the NIRF gene was found at statistically significant levels in diverse tumors. Importantly, a recurrent microdeletion targeting NIRF was observed in non-small cell lung carcinoma. Furthermore, NIRF is immediately adjacent to the single nucleotide polymorphism rs719725, which is reportedly associated with the risk of colorectal cancer. These observations suggest that NIRF occupies a prominent position within the cell cycle network, and is a strong candidate for a tumor suppressor whose aberration contributes to the pathogenesis of diverse malignancies.

21986499|a|PHLPP is a family of Ser/Thr protein phosphatases that contains PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 isoforms. We have shown previously that PHLPP functions as a tumor suppressor by negatively regulating Akt signaling in cancer cells. Here we report the identification of ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) as a novel substrate of PHLPP. Overexpression of both PHLPP isoforms resulted in a decrease in S6K1 phosphorylation in cells, and this PHLPP-mediated dephosphorylation of S6K1 was independent of its ability to dephosphorylate Akt. Conversely, S6K1 phosphorylation was increased in cells depleted of PHLPP expression. Furthermore, we showed that the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) expression and insulin-induced Akt phosphorylation were significantly decreased as the result of activation of the S6K-dependent negative feedback loop in PHLPP knockdown cells. Functionally, the phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6) and the amount of phosphorylated rpS6 bound to the translation initiation complex were increased in PHLPP-knockdown cells. This correlated with increased cell size, protein content, and rate of cap-dependent translation. Taken together, our results demonstrate that loss of PHLPP expression activates the S6K-dependent negative feedback loop and that PHLPP is a novel player involved in regulating protein translation initiation and cell size via direct dephosphorylation of S6K1.

21968187|a|Neuronal Fe65 is a central adapter for the intracellular protein network of Alzheimer's disease related amyloid precursor protein (APP). It contains a unique tandem array of phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains that recognize NPXY internalization motifs present in the intracellular domains of APP (AICD) and the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein LRP1 (LICD). The ternary APP/Fe65/LRP1 complex is an important mediator of APP processing and affects β-amyloid peptide production. Here we dissect by biochemical and biophysical methods the direct interactions within the ternary complex and reveal a phosphorylation-dependent insulin receptor substrate (IRS-) like interaction of the distal NPVY(4507) motif of LICD with Fe65-PTB1.

21829170|a|Glycine receptors (GlyRs) can dynamically exchange between synaptic and extrasynaptic locations through lateral diffusion within the plasma membrane. Their accumulation at inhibitory synapses depends on the interaction of the β-subunit of the GlyR with the synaptic scaffold protein gephyrin. An alteration of receptor-gephyrin binding could thus shift the equilibrium between synaptic and extrasynaptic GlyRs and modulate the strength of inhibitory neurotransmission. Using a combination of dynamic imaging and biochemical approaches, we have characterised the molecular mechanism that links the GlyR-gephyrin interaction with GlyR diffusion and synaptic localisation. We have identified a protein kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation site within the cytoplasmic domain of the β-subunit of the GlyR (residue S403) that causes a reduction of the binding affinity between the receptor and gephyrin. In consequence, the receptor's diffusion in the plasma membrane is accelerated and GlyRs accumulate less strongly at synapses. We propose that the regulation of GlyR dynamics by PKC thus contributes to the plasticity of inhibitory synapses and may be involved in maladaptive forms of synaptic plasticity.

19656744|a|The p53 protein responds to cellular stress and regulates genes involved in cell cycle, apoptosis, and DNA repair. Under normal conditions, p53 levels are kept low through MDM2-mediated ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation. In search for novel proteins that participate in this regulatory loop, we performed an MDM2 peptide pull-down assay and mass spectrometry to screen for potential interacting partners of MDM2. We identified ribosomal protein S3 (RPS3), whose interaction with MDM2, and notably p53, was further established by His and GST pull-down assays, fluorescence resonance energy transfer and an in situ proximity ligation assay. Additionally, in cells exposed to oxidative stress, p53 levels increased slightly over 24h, whereas MDM2 levels declined after 6h exposure, but rose over the next 18h of exposure. Conversely, in cells exposed to oxidative stress and harboring siRNA to knockdown RPS3 expression, decreased p53 levels and loss of the E3 ubiquitin ligase domain possessed by MDM2 were observed. DNA pull-down assays using a 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine duplex oligonucleotide as a substrate found that RPS3 acted as a scaffold for the additional binding of MDM2 and p53, suggesting that RPS3 interacts with important proteins involved in maintaining genomic integrity.

21806020|a|Phosphatase of regenerating liver 3 (PRL-3) is suggested as a biomarker and therapeutic target in several cancers. It has a well-established causative role in cancer metastasis. However, little is known about its natural substrates, pathways, and biological functions, and only a few protein substrates have been suggested so far. To improve our understanding of the substrate specificity and molecular determinants of PRL-3 activity, the wild-type (WT) protein, two supposedly catalytically inactive mutants D72A and C104S, and the reported hyperactive mutant A111S were tested in vitro for substrate specificity and activity toward phosphopeptides and phosphoinositides (PIPs), their structural stability, and their ability to promote cell migration using stable HEK293 cell lines. We discovered that WT PRL-3 does not dephosphorylate the tested phosphopeptides in vitro. However, as shown by two complementary biochemical assays, PRL-3 is active toward the phosphoinositide PI(4,5)P(2). Our experimental results substantiated by molecular docking studies suggest that PRL-3 is a phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphatase. The C104S variant was shown to be not only catalytically inactive but also structurally destabilized and unable to promote cell migration, whereas WT PRL-3 promotes cell migration. The D72A mutant is structurally stable and does not dephosphorylate the unnatural substrate 3-O-methylfluorescein phosphate (OMFP). However, we observed residual in vitro activity of D72A against PI(4,5)P(2), and in accordance with this, it exhibits the same cellular phenotype as WT PRL-3. Our analysis of the A111S variant shows that the hyperactivity toward the unnatural OMFP substrate is not apparent in dephosphorylation assays with phosphoinositides: the mutant is completely inactive against PIPs. We observed significant structural destabilization of this variant. The cellular phenotype of this mutant equals that of the catalytically inactive C104S mutant. These results provide a possible explanation for the absence of the conserved Ser of the PTP catalytic motif in the PRL family. The correlation of the phosphatase activity toward PI(4,5)P(2) with the observed phenotypes for WT PRL-3 and the mutants suggests a link between the PI(4,5)P(2) dephosphorylation by PRL-3 and its role in cell migration.

21821029|a|Amplification of Aurora-A, encoding a cell cycle-regulating kinase, has been reported in human cancers. Although Aurora-A is known to directly phosphorylate and down-regulate p53, the detailed mechanism remains unclear. Here we show that Aurora-A phosphorylates hnRNPK, a transcriptional coactivator of p53, on serine 379. This phosphorylation does not affect the post-transcriptional activity or cellular localization of hnRNPK, but disrupts its interaction with p53. Inverse correlation between Aurora-A activity and hnRNPK-p53 interaction was further demonstrated in DNA-damaged cells. Our results provide an alternative mechanism, whereby via phosphorylating hnRNPK Aurora-A participates in regulating p53 activity during DNA damage.

21985244|a|Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein (tau) causes neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recent studies of the physiological correlation between tau and α-synuclein (α-SN) have demonstrated that: (a) phosphorylated tau is also present in Lewy bodies, which are cytoplasmic inclusions formed by abnormal aggregation of α-SN; and (b) the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) increases the phosphorylation of tau as well as the protein level of α-SN in cultured neuronal cells, and also in mice. However, the molecular mechanism responsible for the α-SN-mediated hyperphosphorylation of tau remains to be elucidated. In this in vitro study, we found that: (a) α-SN directly stimulates the phosphorylation of tau by glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β), (b) α-SN forms a heterotrimeric complex with tau and GSK-3β, and (c) the nonamyloid beta component (NAC) domain and an acidic region of α-SN are responsible for the stimulation of GSK-3β-mediated tau phosphorylation. Thus, it is concluded that α-SN functions as a connecting mediator for tau and GSK-3β, resulting in GSK-3β-mediated tau phosphorylation. Because the expression of α-SN is promoted by oxidative stress, the accumulation of α-SN induced by such stress may directly induce the hyperphosphorylation of tau by GSK-3β. Furthermore, we found that heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) suppresses the α-SN-induced phosphorylation of tau by GSK-3β through its direct binding to α-SN, suggesting that Hsp70 acts as a physiological suppressor of α-SN-mediated tau hyperphosphorylation. These results suggest that the cellular level of Hsp70 may be a novel therapeutic target to counteract α-SN-mediated tau phosphorylation in the initial stage of neurodegenerative disease.

21857666|a|Mammalian RNF4 is a dimeric RING ubiquitin E3 ligase that ubiquitylates poly-SUMOylated proteins. We found that RNF4 bound ubiquitin-charged UbcH5a tightly but free UbcH5a weakly. To provide insight into the mechanism of RING-mediated ubiquitylation, we docked the UbcH5~ubiquitin thioester onto the RNF4 RING structure. This revealed that with E2 bound to one monomer of RNF4, the thioester-linked ubiquitin could reach across the dimer to engage the other monomer. In this model, the 'Ile44 hydrophobic patch' of ubiquitin is predicted to engage a conserved tyrosine located at the dimer interface of the RING, and mutation of these residues blocked ubiquitylation activity. Thus, dimeric RING ligases are not simply inert scaffolds that bring substrate and E2-loaded ubiquitin into close proximity. Instead, they facilitate ubiquitin transfer by preferentially binding the E2~ubiquitin thioester across the dimer and activating the thioester bond for catalysis.

21782458|a|Protein lysine methyltransferases are important regulators of epigenetic signaling. These enzymes catalyze the transfer of donor methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine to specific acceptor lysines on histones, leading to changes in chromatin structure and transcriptional regulation. These enzymes also methylate nonhistone protein substrates, revealing an additional mechanism to regulate cellular physiology. The oncogenic protein SMYD2 represses the functional activities of the tumor suppressor proteins p53 and Rb, making it an attractive drug target. Here we report the discovery of AZ505, a potent and selective inhibitor of SMYD2 that was identified from a high throughput chemical screen. We also present the crystal structures of SMYD2 with p53 substrate and product peptides, and notably, in complex with AZ505. This substrate competitive inhibitor is bound in the peptide binding groove of SMYD2. These results have implications for the development of SMYD2 inhibitors, and indicate the potential for developing novel therapies targeting this target class.

21911379|a|The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein kinase/endoribonuclease inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) is activated through transautophosphorylation in response to protein folding overload in the ER lumen and maintains ER homeostasis by triggering a key branch of the unfolded protein response. Here we show that mammalian IRE1α in liver cells is also phosphorylated by a kinase other than itself in response to metabolic stimuli. Glucagon-stimulated protein kinase PKA, which in turn phosphorylated IRE1α at Ser(724), a highly conserved site within the kinase activation domain. Blocking Ser(724) phosphorylation impaired the ability of IRE1α to augment the up-regulation by glucagon signaling of the expression of gluconeogenic genes. Moreover, hepatic IRE1α was highly phosphorylated at Ser(724) by PKA in mice with obesity, and silencing hepatic IRE1α markedly reduced hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance. Hence, these results suggest that IRE1α integrates signals from both the ER lumen and the cytoplasm in the liver and is coupled to the glucagon signaling in the regulation of glucose metabolism.

21841788|a|Human JAK2 tyrosine kinase mediates signaling through numerous cytokine receptors. The JAK2 JH2 domain functions as a negative regulator and is presumed to be a catalytically inactive pseudokinase, but the mechanism(s) for its inhibition of JAK2 remains unknown. Mutations in JH2 lead to increased JAK2 activity, contributing to myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). Here we show that JH2 is a dual-specificity protein kinase that phosphorylates two negative regulatory sites in JAK2: Ser523 and Tyr570. Inactivation of JH2 catalytic activity increased JAK2 basal activity and downstream signaling. Notably, different MPN mutations abrogated JH2 activity in cells, and in MPN (V617F) patient cells phosphorylation of Tyr570 was reduced, suggesting that loss of JH2 activity contributes to the pathogenesis of MPNs. These results identify the catalytic activity of JH2 as a previously unrecognized mechanism to control basal activity and signaling of JAK2.

19576176|a|Mutations in the alpha synuclein gene (SNCA) are the most potent cause of autosomal dominant Parkinson disease (PD) while mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common cause. We hypothesized that a direct interaction may exist between their protein products. Here we show that full-length Lrrk2 or fragments containing its kinase domain have a significant capacity to phosphorylate recombinant alpha synuclein (Asyn) at serine 129. Such phosphorylated Asyn is the major component of pathological deposits in PD. We further show that the G2019S mutation in Lrrk2, which is the most common genetic determinant of PD, has a significantly greater capacity than wild-type Lrrk2 to phosphorylate Asyn. This suggests that the G2019S mutant protein may cause PD by generating pathological levels of phosphorylated Asyn. Controlling Lrrk2 Asyn phosphokinase activity may be an approach to disease modifying therapy for PD and other synucleinopathies.

21880142|a|Post-transcriptional processing of pre-mRNA takes place in several steps and requires involvement of a number of RNA-binding proteins. How pre-mRNA processing is regulated is in large enigmatic. The catalytic (C) subunit of protein kinase A (PKA) is a serine/threonine kinase, which regulates numerous cellular processes including pre-mRNA splicing. Despite that a significant fraction of the C subunit is found in splicing factor compartments in the nucleus, there are no indications of a direct interaction between RNA and PKA. Based on this we speculate if the specificity of the C subunit in regulating pre-mRNA splicing may be mediated indirectly through other nuclear proteins.

21781306|a|The proto-oncogene, c-Abl encodes a ubiquitously expressed tyrosine kinase that critically governs the cell death response induced by genotoxic agents such as ionizing radiation and cisplatin. The catalytic function of Abl, which is essential for executing DNA damage response (DDR), is normally tightly regulated but upregulated several folds upon IR exposure due to ATM-mediated phosphorylation on S465. However, the mechanism/s leading to activation of Abl's apoptotic activity is currently unknown.

21771788|a|A zinc finger protein, ZPR9, has been identified as a physiological substrate of murine protein serine/threonine kinase 38 (MPK38), which is involved in various cellular responses, including the cell cycle, apoptosis, embryonic development, and oncogenesis. Here, ZPR9 was found to physically interact with apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) through a disulfide linkage involving Cys(1351) and Cys(1360) of ASK1 and Cys(305) and Cys(308) of ZPR9. ASK1 directly phosphorylated ZPR9 at Ser(314) and Thr(318), suggesting that ZPR9 can act as an ASK1 substrate. Ectopic expression of wild-type ZPR9, but not an S314A/T318A mutant, stimulated ASK1 kinase activity and positively regulated ASK1-mediated signaling to both JNK and p38 kinases by destabilizing complex formation between ASK1 and its negative regulators, Trx and 14-3-3, or by increasing complex formation between ASK1 and its substrate MKK3. ZPR9 functionally stimulated ASK1-induced AP-1 transcriptional activity as well as H(2)O(2)-mediated apoptosis in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. ASK1-mediated phosphorylation of ZPR9 at Ser(314) and Thr(318) was also responsible for ZPR9-induced apoptosis. Moreover, ZPR9 inhibited PDK1-mediated signaling through ASK1 activation. These results suggest that ZPR9 functions as a novel positive regulator of ASK1.

21920476|a|Protein phosphorylation by kinases plays a central role in the regulation and coordination of multiple biological processes. In general, knowledge on kinase specificity is restricted to substrates identified in the context of specific cellular responses, but kinases are likely to have multiple additional substrates and be integrated in signaling networks that might be spatially and temporally different, and in which protein complexes and subcellular localization can play an important role. In this report the substrate specificity of atypical human vaccinia-related kinases (VRK1 and VRK2) using a human peptide-array containing 1080 sequences phosphorylated in known signaling pathways has been studied. The two kinases identify a subset of potential peptide targets, all of them result in a consensus sequence composed of at least four basic residues in peptide targets. Linear peptide arrays are therefore a useful approach in the characterization of kinases and substrate identification, which can contribute to delineate the signaling network in which VRK proteins participate. One of these target proteins is coilin; a basic protein located in nuclear Cajal bodies. Coilin is phosphorylated in Ser184 by both VRK1 and VRK2. Coilin colocalizes and interacts with VRK1 in Cajal bodies, but not with the mutant VRK1 (R358X). VRK1 (R358X) is less active than VRK1. Altered regulation of coilin might be implicated in several neurological diseases such as ataxias and spinal muscular atrophies.

19563760|a|Signaling by the epidermal growth factor receptor requires an allosteric interaction between the kinase domains of two receptors, whereby one activates the other. We show that the intracellular juxtamembrane segment of the receptor, known to potentiate kinase activity, is able to dimerize the kinase domains. The C-terminal half of the juxtamembrane segment latches the activated kinase domain to the activator, and the N-terminal half of this segment further potentiates dimerization, most likely by forming an antiparallel helical dimer that engages the transmembrane helices of the activated receptor. Our data are consistent with a mechanism in which the extracellular domains block the intrinsic ability of the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains to dimerize and activate, with ligand binding releasing this block. The formation of the activating juxtamembrane latch is prevented by the C-terminal tails in a structure of an inactive kinase domain dimer, suggesting how alternative dimers can prevent ligand-independent activation.

21931591|a|The RIP kinases have emerged as essential mediators of cellular stress that integrate both extracellular stimuli emanating from various cell-surface receptors and signals coming from intracellular pattern recognition receptors. The molecular mechanisms regulating the ability of the RIP proteins to transduce the stress signals remain poorly understood, but seem to rely only partially on their kinase activities. Recent studies on RIP1 and RIP2 have highlighted the importance of ubiquitination as a key process regulating their capacity to activate downstream signaling pathways. In this study, we found that XIAP, cIAP1 and cIAP2 not only directly bind to RIP1 and RIP2 but also to RIP3 and RIP4. We show that cIAP1 and cIAP2 are direct E3 ubiquitin ligases for all four RIP proteins and that cIAP1 is capable of conjugating the RIPs with diverse types of ubiquitin chains, including linear chains. Consistently, we show that repressing cIAP1/2 levels affects the activation of NF-κB that is dependent on RIP1, -2, -3 and -4. Finally, we identified Lys51 and Lys145 of RIP4 as two critical residues for cIAP1-mediated ubiquitination and NF-κB activation.

21965663|a|Two genes on chromosome 21, namely dual specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (Dyrk1A) and regulator of calcineurin 1 (RCAN1), have been implicated in some of the phenotypic characteristics of Down syndrome, including the early onset of Alzheimer disease. Although a link between Dyrk1A and RCAN1 and the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) pathway has been reported, it remains unclear whether Dyrk1A directly interacts with RCAN1. In the present study, Dyrk1A is shown to directly interact with and phosphorylate RCAN1 at Ser(112) and Thr(192) residues. Dyrk1A-mediated phosphorylation of RCAN1 at Ser(112) primes the protein for the GSK3β-mediated phosphorylation of Ser(108). Phosphorylation of RCAN1 at Thr(192) by Dyrk1A enhances the ability of RCAN1 to inhibit the phosphatase activity of calcineurin (Caln), leading to reduced NFAT transcriptional activity and enhanced Tau phosphorylation. These effects are mediated by the enhanced binding of RCAN1 to Caln and its extended half-life caused by Dyrk1A-mediated phosphorylation. Furthermore, an increased expression of phospho-Thr(192)-RCAN1 was observed in the brains of transgenic mice overexpressing the Dyrk1A protein. These results suggest a direct link between Dyrk1A and RCAN1 in the Caln-NFAT signaling and Tau hyperphosphorylation pathways, supporting the notion that the synergistic interaction between the chromosome 21 genes RCAN1 and Dyrk1A is associated with a variety of pathological features associated with DS.

19559761|a|Autosomal dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of late-onset Parkinson's disease. However, the regulators/effectors contributing to the (patho-)physiological functions of LRRK2 remain poorly defined. Here we show that human LRRK2 co-purifies/co-immunoprecipitates with elongation factor 1-alpha (EF1A). Co-incubation of recombinant LRRK2 and EF1A significantly reduces the kinase activity of LRRK2, whereas its GTPase activity remains unchanged. In addition to its canonical role in mRNA translation, EF1A maintains stability of the microtubule cytoskeleton. In the present study, EF1A promotes microtubule assembly in an in vitro tubulin polymerization assay which is impaired by co-incubation with LRRK2 at sub-stoichiometric concentrations. These findings suggest that the interaction between LRRK2 and EF1A may reciprocally modulate their physiological function.

21840486|a|Tumor hypoxia is associated with disease progression and treatment failure, but the hypoxia signaling mechanism is not fully understood. Here, we show that KLHL20, a Cullin3 (Cul3) substrate adaptor induced by HIF-1, coordinates with the actions of CDK1/2 and Pin1 to mediate hypoxia-induced PML proteasomal degradation. Furthermore, this PML destruction pathway participates in a feedback mechanism to maximize HIF-1α induction, thereby potentiating multiple tumor hypoxia responses, including metabolic reprogramming, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration, tumor growth, angiogenesis, and chemoresistance. In human prostate cancer, overexpression of HIF-1α, KLHL20, and Pin1 correlates with PML down-regulation, and hyperactivation of the PML destruction pathway is associated with disease progression. Our study indicates that the KLHL20-mediated PML degradation and HIF-1α autoregulation play key roles in tumor progression.

21887822|a|We previously demonstrated that when arsenic trioxide (ATO)-induced mitotically arrested HeLa S3 cells (AIMACs) were treated with staurosporine (SSP) the cells rapidly exited mitosis. To better define the cellular targets and the underlying mechanisms of AIMACs, we applied 2-D DIGE followed by LC-MS/MS analysis and showed that SSP induced a significant change in the phosphoproteome of AIMACs. Among the proteins whose phosphorylation was modulated by SSP, we identified Hsp70, Rad 23B, and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B as potentially new substrates of polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), an essential serine/threonine kinase with versatile mitotic functions. Since Hsp70 is a stress protein responsible for ATO treatment, we further identified Thr(13) , Ser(362) , Ser(631) , and Ser(633)  on Hsp70 intracellularly phosphorylated in AIMACs by combining TiO(2)  phospho-peptides enrichment and MS/MS analysis. Using antibody specifically against phosph-Ser(631)  Hsp70 and further aided by expression of kinase-dead Plk1 and pharmacological inhibition of Plk1, we concluded that Ser(631)  on Hsp70 is phosphorylated by Plk1 in AIMACs. By immnuofluorescent staining, we found the colocalization of Hsp70 and Plk1 in AIMACs but not in interphase cells. In addition, Plk1-mediated phosphorylation of Hsp70 prevented AIMACs from mitotic death. Our results reveal that Hsp70 is a novel substrate of Plk1 and that its phosphorylation contributes to attenuation of ATO-induced mitotic abnormalities.

23460737|a|Thymocyte-expressed molecule involved in selection (THEMIS) is a recently identified regulator of thymocyte positive selection. THEMIS's mechanism of action is unknown, and whether it has a role in TCR-proximal signaling is controversial. In this article, we show that THEMIS and the adapter molecule growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) associate constitutively through binding of a conserved PxRPxK motif within the proline-rich region 1 of THEMIS to the C-terminal SH3-domain of GRB2. This association is indispensable for THEMIS recruitment to the immunological synapse via the transmembrane adapter linker for activation of T cells (LAT) and for THEMIS phosphorylation by Lck and ZAP-70. Two major sites of tyrosine phosphorylation were mapped to a YY-motif close to proline-rich region 1. The YY-motif was crucial for GRB2 binding, suggesting that this region of THEMIS might control local phosphorylation-dependent conformational changes important for THEMIS function. Finally, THEMIS binding to GRB2 was required for thymocyte development. Our data firmly assign THEMIS to the TCR-proximal signaling cascade as a participant in the LAT signalosome and suggest that the THEMIS-GRB2 complex might be involved in shaping the nature of Ras signaling, thereby governing thymic selection.

21884935|a|Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) forms a highly conserved dodecameric assembly that is sensitive to the frequency of calcium pulse trains. Neither the structure of the dodecameric assembly nor how it regulates CaMKII are known. We present the crystal structure of an autoinhibited full-length human CaMKII holoenzyme, revealing an unexpected compact arrangement of kinase domains docked against a central hub, with the calmodulin-binding sites completely inaccessible. We show that this compact docking is important for the autoinhibition of the kinase domains and for setting the calcium response of the holoenzyme. Comparison of CaMKII isoforms, which differ in the length of the linker between the kinase domain and the hub, demonstrates that these interactions can be strengthened or weakened by changes in linker length. This equilibrium between autoinhibited states provides a simple mechanism for tuning the calcium response without changes in either the hub or the kinase domains.

21730291|a|MICALs (molecules interacting with CasL) are atypical multidomain flavoenzymes with diverse cellular functions. The molecular pathways employed by MICAL proteins to exert their cellular effects remain largely uncharacterized. Via an unbiased proteomics approach, we identify MICAL-1 as a binding partner of NDR (nuclear Dbf2-related) kinases. NDR1/2 kinases are known to mediate apoptosis downstream of the mammalian Ste-20-like kinase MST1, and ablation of NDR1 in mice predisposes the mice to cancer as a result of compromised apoptosis. MST1 phosphorylates NDR1/2 kinases at their hydrophobic motif, thereby facilitating full NDR kinase activity and function. However, if and how this key phosphorylation event is regulated are unknown. Here we show that MICAL-1 interacts with the hydrophobic motif of NDR1/2 and that overexpression or knockdown of MICAL-1 reduces or augments NDR kinase activation or activity, respectively. Surprisingly, MICAL-1 is a phosphoprotein but not an NDR or MST1 substrate. Rather, MICAL-1 competes with MST1 for NDR binding and thereby antagonizes MST1-induced NDR activation. In line with this inhibitory effect, overexpression or knockdown of MICAL-1 inhibits or enhances, respectively, NDR-dependent proapoptotic signaling induced by extrinsic stimuli. Our findings unveil a previously unknown biological role for MICAL-1 in apoptosis and define a novel negative regulatory mechanism of MST-NDR signaling.

24766807|a|PTEN dysfunction plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of hereditary and sporadic cancers. Here, we show that PTEN homodimerizes and, in this active conformation, exerts lipid phosphatase activity on PtdIns(3,4,5)P3. We demonstrate that catalytically inactive cancer-associated PTEN mutants heterodimerize with wild-type PTEN and constrain its phosphatase activity in a dominant-negative manner. To study the consequences of homo- and heterodimerization of wild-type and mutant PTEN in vivo, we generated Pten knockin mice harboring two cancer-associated PTEN mutations (PtenC124S and PtenG129E). Heterozygous Pten(C124S/+) and Pten(G129E/+) cells and tissues exhibit increased sensitivity to PI3-K/Akt activation compared to wild-type and Pten(+/-) counterparts, whereas this difference is no longer apparent between Pten(C124S/-) and Pten(-/-) cells. Notably, Pten KI mice are more tumor prone and display features reminiscent of complete Pten loss. Our findings reveal that PTEN loss and PTEN mutations are not synonymous and define a working model for the function and regulation of PTEN.

24794857|a|Mutations in LRRK2 are one of the primary genetic causes of Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 contains a kinase and a GTPase domain, and familial PD mutations affect both enzymatic activities. However, the signaling mechanisms regulating LRRK2 and the pathogenic effects of familial mutations remain unknown. Identifying the signaling proteins that regulate LRRK2 function and toxicity remains a critical goal for the development of effective therapeutic strategies. In this study, we apply systems biology tools to human PD brain and blood transcriptomes to reverse-engineer a LRRK2-centered gene regulatory network. This network identifies several putative master regulators of LRRK2 function. In particular, the signaling gene RGS2, which encodes for a GTPase-activating protein (GAP), is a key regulatory hub connecting the familial PD-associated genes DJ-1 and PINK1 with LRRK2 in the network. RGS2 expression levels are reduced in the striata of LRRK2 and sporadic PD patients. We identify RGS2 as a novel interacting partner of LRRK2 in vivo. RGS2 regulates both the GTPase and kinase activities of LRRK2. We show in mammalian neurons that RGS2 regulates LRRK2 function in the control of neuronal process length. RGS2 is also protective against neuronal toxicity of the most prevalent mutation in LRRK2, G2019S. We find that RGS2 regulates LRRK2 function and neuronal toxicity through its effects on kinase activity and independently of GTPase activity, which reveals a novel mode of action for GAP proteins. This work identifies RGS2 as a promising target for interfering with neurodegeneration due to LRRK2 mutations in PD patients. 

24735922|a|Hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) are benign liver tumors predominantly developed in women using oral contraceptives. Here, exome sequencing identified recurrent somatic FRK mutations that induce constitutive kinase activity, STAT3 activation, and cell proliferation sensitive to Src inhibitors. We also found uncommon recurrent mutations activating JAK1, gp130, or β-catenin. Chromosome copy number and methylation profiling revealed patterns that correlated with specific gene mutations and tumor phenotypes. Finally, integrative analysis of HCAs transformed to hepatocellular carcinoma revealed β-catenin mutation as an early alteration and TERT promoter mutations as associated with the last step of the adenoma-carcinoma transition. In conclusion, we identified the genomic diversity in benign hepatocyte proliferation, several therapeutic targets, and the key genomic determinants of the adenoma-carcinoma transformation sequence. 

24754922|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common cause of dominant and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD), a common neurodegenerative disorder. Yeast-two-hybrid screening using human LRRK2 kinase domain as bait identified microtubule associated protein 1B (MAP1B) as a LRRK2 interactor. The interacting domains were LRRK2 kinase and the light chain portion of MAP1B (LC1). LRRK2 + LC1 interaction resulted in LRRK2 kinase inhibition. LRRK2 mutants (R1441C, G2019S and I2020T) exhibited decreased endogenous LC1 expression and its co-expression with LC1 rescued LRRK2 mutant-mediated toxicity. This study presented the first data on the effects of LRRK2 + LC1 interaction and also suggested that LCI possibly rescued LRRK2 mutant-induced cytotoxicity by inhibiting LRRK2 kinase activity. Compounds that upregulate LC1 expression may therefore hold therapeutic potential for LRRK2-linked diseases. 

24725412|a|Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a common cause of familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). Elevated LRRK2 kinase activity and neurodegeneration are linked, but the phosphosubstrate that connects LRRK2 kinase activity to neurodegeneration is not known. Here, we show that ribosomal protein s15 is a key pathogenic LRRK2 substrate in Drosophila and human neuron PD models. Phosphodeficient s15 carrying a threonine 136 to alanine substitution rescues dopamine neuron degeneration and age-related locomotor deficits in G2019S LRRK2 transgenic Drosophila and substantially reduces G2019S LRRK2-mediated neurite loss and cell death in human dopamine and cortical neurons. Remarkably, pathogenic LRRK2 stimulates both cap-dependent and cap-independent mRNA translation and induces a bulk increase in protein synthesis in Drosophila, which can be prevented by phosphodeficient T136A s15. These results reveal a novel mechanism of PD pathogenesis linked to elevated LRRK2 kinase activity and aberrant protein synthesis in vivo.

23452857|a|The activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate-receptors (NMDARs) in synapses provides plasticity and cell survival signals, whereas NMDARs residing in the neuronal membrane outside synapses trigger neurodegeneration. At present, it is unclear how these opposing signals are transduced to and discriminated by the nucleus. In this study, we demonstrate that Jacob is a protein messenger that encodes the origin of synaptic versus extrasynaptic NMDAR signals and delivers them to the nucleus. Exclusively synaptic, but not extrasynaptic, NMDAR activation induces phosphorylation of Jacob at serine-180 by ERK1/2. Long-distance trafficking of Jacob from synaptic, but not extrasynaptic, sites depends on ERK activity, and association with fragments of the intermediate filament α-internexin hinders dephosphorylation of the Jacob/ERK complex during nuclear transit. In the nucleus, the phosphorylation state of Jacob determines whether it induces cell death or promotes cell survival and enhances synaptic plasticity.

24726729|a|Cellular nucleic acid binding protein (CNBP) contains seven zinc finger (ZF) repeats and an arginine and glycine (RG) rich sequence between the first and the second ZF. CNBP interacts with protein arginine methyltransferase PRMT1. Full-length but not RG-deleted or mutated CNBP can be methylated. Treatment with a methylation inhibitor AdOx reduced CNBP methylation, but did not affect the concentrated nuclear localization of CNBP. Nevertheless, arginine methylation of CNBP appeared to interfere with its RNA binding activity. Our findings show that arginine methylation of CNBP in the RG motif did not change the subcellular localization, but regulated its RNA binding activity.

24813628|a|G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) control the signaling and activation of G protein-coupled receptors through phosphorylation. In this study, consensus substrate motifs for GRK2 were identified from the sequences of GRK2 protein substrates, and 17 candidate peptides were synthesized to identify peptide substrates with high affinity for GRK2. GRK2 appears to require an acidic amino acid at the -2, -3, or -4 positions and its consensus phosphorylation site motifs were identified as (D/E)X1-3(S/T), (D/E)X1-3(S/T)(D/E), or (D/E)X0-2(D/E)(S/T). Among the 17 peptide substrates examined, a 13-amino-acid peptide fragment of β-tubulin (DEMEFTEAESNMN) showed the highest affinity for GRK2 (Km, 33.9 μM; Vmax, 0.35 pmol min(-1) mg(-1)), but very low affinity for GRK5. This peptide may be a useful tool for investigating cellular signaling pathways regulated by GRK2.

24726341|a|Trypanosoma brucei protein arginine methyltransferase 7 (TbPRMT7) exclusively generates monomethylarginine (MMA), which directs biological consequences distinct from that of symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA) and asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA). However, determinants controlling the strict monomethylation activity are unknown. We present the crystal structure of the TbPRMT7 active core in complex with S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine (AdoHcy) and a histone H4 peptide substrate. In the active site, residues E172, E181, and Q329 hydrogen bond the guanidino group of the target arginine and align the terminal guanidino nitrogen in a position suitable for nucleophilic attack on the methyl group of S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet). Structural comparisons and isothermal titration calorimetry data suggest that the TbPRMT7 active site is narrower than those of protein arginine dimethyltransferases, making it unsuitable to bind MMA in a manner that would support a second turnover, thus abolishing the production of SDMA and ADMA. Our results present the structural interpretations for the monomethylation activity of TbPRMT7. 

23441852|a|The regulation of gene repression by corepressors is a controlled process. Surface-enhanced laser desorption ionization MS proteomic analysis and a yeast two-hybrid screen showed independently that the corepressor Alien interacts with the CREB-binding protein (CBP) coactivator. This interaction was further confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments, suggesting that Alien interacts in vivo and in vitro with the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) coactivators CBP and its paralog p300. Acetylation detection experiments indicated that Alien is acetylated in vivo. Furthermore, Alien interacts with the central region of CBP/p300 containing the HAT domain and becomes acetylated in vitro. When an inhibitor of CBP/p300 HAT activity was employed, the Alien-mediated silencing was enhanced. Thus, these findings suggest crosstalk between corepressors and coactivators, and indicate fine-tuning of corepressor function by post-translational modification through corepressor acetylation.

24498420|a|ERα functions are tightly controlled by numerous post-translational modifications including arginine methylation, which is required to mediate the extranuclear functions of the receptor. We report that upon oestrogenic stimulation, JMJD6, the only arginine demethylase described so far, interacts with and regulates methylated ERα (metERα) function. Moreover, by combining the silencing of JMJD6 with demethylation assays, we show that metERα is a new substrate for JMJD6. We propose that the demethylase activity of JMJD6 is a decisive regulator of the rapid physiological responses to oestrogen. 

24591568|a|Apical lumen formation is a key step during epithelial morphogenesis. The establishment of the apical lumen is a complex process that involves coordinated changes in plasma membrane composition, endocytic transport, and cytoskeleton organization. These changes are accomplished, at least in part, by the targeting and fusion of Rab11/FIP5-containing apical endosomes with the apical membrane initiation site (AMIS). Although AMIS formation and polarized transport of Rab11/FIP5-containing endosomes are crucial for the formation of a single apical lumen, the spatiotemporal regulation of this process remains poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the formation of the midbody during cytokinesis is a symmetry-breaking event that establishes the location of the AMIS. The interaction of FIP5 with SNX18, which is required for the formation of apical endocytic carriers, is inhibited by GSK-3 phosphorylation at FIP5-T276. Importantly, we show that FIP5-T276 phosphorylation occurs specifically during metaphase and anaphase, to ensure the fidelity and timing of FIP5-endosome targeting to the AMIS during apical lumen formation. 

24670654|a|Akt, also known as protein kinase B, plays key roles in cell proliferation, survival and metabolism. Akt hyperactivation contributes to many pathophysiological conditions, including human cancers, and is closely associated with poor prognosis and chemo- or radiotherapeutic resistance. Phosphorylation of Akt at S473 (ref. 5) and T308 (ref. 6) activates Akt. However, it remains unclear whether further mechanisms account for full Akt activation, and whether Akt hyperactivation is linked to misregulated cell cycle progression, another cancer hallmark. Here we report that Akt activity fluctuates across the cell cycle, mirroring cyclin A expression. Mechanistically, phosphorylation of S477 and T479 at the Akt extreme carboxy terminus by cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (Cdk2)/cyclin A or mTORC2, under distinct physiological conditions, promotes Akt activation through facilitating, or functionally compensating for, S473 phosphorylation. Furthermore, deletion of the cyclin A2 allele in the mouse olfactory bulb leads to reduced S477/T479 phosphorylation and elevated cellular apoptosis. Notably, cyclin A2-deletion-induced cellular apoptosis in mouse embryonic stem cells is partly rescued by S477D/T479E-Akt1, supporting a physiological role for cyclin A2 in governing Akt activation. Together, the results of our study show Akt S477/T479 phosphorylation to be an essential layer of the Akt activation mechanism to regulate its physiological functions, thereby providing a new mechanistic link between aberrant cell cycle progression and Akt hyperactivation in cancer. 

24463463|a|T-cell receptor (TCR) phosphorylation is controlled by a complex network that includes Lck, a Src family kinase (SFK), the tyrosine phosphatase CD45 and the Lck-inhibitory kinase Csk. How these competing phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions are modulated to produce T-cell triggering is not fully understood. Here we reconstituted this signaling network using purified enzymes on liposomes, recapitulating the membrane environment in which they normally interact. We demonstrate that Lck's enzymatic activity can be regulated over an ~10-fold range by controlling its phosphorylation state. By varying kinase and phosphatase concentrations, we constructed phase diagrams that reveal ultrasensitivity in the transition from the quiescent to the phosphorylated state and demonstrate that co-clustering TCR and Lck or detaching Csk from the membrane can trigger TCR phosphorylation. Our results provide insight into the mechanism of TCR signaling as well as other signaling pathways involving SFKs. 

23446420|a|Growth of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) requires high levels of hedgehog (HH) signalling through the transcription factor GLI. Although inhibitors of membrane protein smoothened (SMO) effectively suppress HH signalling, early tumour resistance illustrates the need for additional downstream targets for therapy. Here we identify atypical protein kinase C ι/λ (aPKC-ι/λ) as a novel GLI regulator in mammals. aPKC-ι/λ and its polarity signalling partners co-localize at the centrosome and form a complex with missing-in-metastasis (MIM), a scaffolding protein that potentiates HH signalling. Genetic or pharmacological loss of aPKC-ι/λ function blocks HH signalling and proliferation of BCC cells. Prkci is a HH target gene that forms a positive feedback loop with GLI and exists at increased levels in BCCs. Genome-wide transcriptional profiling shows that aPKC-ι/λ and SMO control the expression of similar genes in tumour cells. aPKC-ι/λ functions downstream of SMO to phosphorylate and activate GLI1, resulting in maximal DNA binding and transcriptional activation. Activated aPKC-ι/λ is upregulated in SMO-inhibitor-resistant tumours and targeting aPKC-ι/λ suppresses signalling and growth of resistant BCC cell lines. These results demonstrate that aPKC-ι/λ is critical for HH-dependent processes and implicates aPKC-ι/λ as a new, tumour-selective therapeutic target for the treatment of SMO-inhibitor-resistant cancers.

24525231|a|We report that two oncogenes coamplified on chromosome 3q26, PRKCI and SOX2, cooperate to drive a stem-like phenotype in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC). Protein kinase Cι (PKCι) phosphorylates SOX2, a master transcriptional regulator of stemness, and recruits it to the promoter of Hedgehog (Hh) acyltransferase (HHAT) that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in Hh ligand production. PKCι-mediated SOX2 phosphorylation is required for HHAT promoter occupancy, HHAT expression, and maintenance of a stem-like phenotype. Primary LSCC tumors coordinately overexpress PKCι, SOX2, and HHAT and require PKCι-SOX2-HHAT signaling to maintain a stem-like phenotype. Thus, PKCι and SOX2 are genetically, biochemically, and functionally linked in LSCC, and together they drive tumorigenesis by establishing a cell-autonomous Hh signaling axis. 

24695735|a|The effect of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation I2020T on its kinase activity has been controversial, with both increased and decreased effects being reported. We conducted steady-state and pre-steady-state kinetic studies on LRRKtide and its analog LRRKtide(S). Their phosphorylation differs by the rate-limiting steps: product release is rate-limiting for LRRKtide and phosphoryl transfer is rate-limiting for LRRKtide(S). As a result, we observed that the I2020T mutant is more active than wild type (WT) LRRK2 for LRRKtide(S) phosphorylation, whereas it is less active than WT for LRRKtide phosphorylation. Our pre-steady-state kinetic data suggest that (i) the I2020T mutant accelerates the rates of phosphoryl transfer of both reactions by 3-7-fold; (ii) this increase is masked by a rate-limiting product release step for LRRKtide phosphorylation; and (iii) the observed lower activity of the mutant for LRRKtide phosphorylation is a consequence of its instability: the concentration of the active form of the mutant is 3-fold lower than WT. The I2020T mutant has a dramatically low KATP and therefore leads to resistance to ATP competitive inhibitors. Two well known DFG-out or type II inhibitors are also weaker toward the mutant because they inhibit the mutant in an unexpected ATP competitive mechanism. The I2020 residue lies next to the DYG motif of the activation loop of the LRRK2 kinase domain. Our modeling and metadynamic simulations suggest that the I2020T mutant stabilizes the DYG-in active conformation and creates an unusual allosteric pocket that can bind type II inhibitors but in an ATP competitive fashion. 

23473668|a|Necroptosis is a cellular mechanism that mediates necrotic cell death. The receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein kinase 1 (RIP1) is an essential upstream signaling molecule in tumor-necrosis-factor-α-induced necroptosis. Necrostatins, a series of small-molecule inhibitors, suppress necroptosis by specifically inhibiting RIP1 kinase activity. Both RIP1 structure and the mechanisms by which necrostatins inhibit RIP1 remain unknown. Here, we report the crystal structures of the RIP1 kinase domain individually bound to necrostatin-1 analog, necrostatin-3 analog, and necrostatin-4. Necrostatin, caged in a hydrophobic pocket between the N- and C-lobes of the kinase domain, stabilizes RIP1 in an inactive conformation through interactions with highly conserved amino acids in the activation loop and the surrounding structural elements. Structural comparison of RIP1 with the inhibitor-bound oncogenic kinase B-RAF reveals partially overlapping binding sites for necrostatin and for the anticancer compound PLX4032. Our study provides a structural basis for RIP1 inhibition by necrostatins and offers insights into potential structure-based drug design.

24606918|a|Abnormal metabolism and sustained proliferation are hallmarks of cancer. Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) is a metabolic enzyme that plays important roles in both processes. Recently, PKM2 was shown to have protein kinase activity phosphorylating histone H3 and promoting cancer cell proliferation. However, the mechanism and extent of this protein kinase in cancer cells remain unclear. Here, we report that binding of succinyl-5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-ribose-5'-phosphate (SAICAR), a metabolite abundant in proliferating cells, induces PKM2's protein kinase activity in vitro and in cells. Protein microarray experiments revealed that more than 100 human proteins, mostly protein kinases, are phosphorylated by PKM2-SAICAR. In particular, PKM2-SAICAR phosphorylates and activates Erk1/2, which in turn sensitizes PKM2 for SAICAR binding through phosphorylation. Additionally, PKM2-SAICAR was necessary to induce sustained Erk1/2 activation and mitogen-induced cell proliferation. Thus, the ligand-induced protein kinase activity from PKM2 is a mechanism that directly couples cell proliferation with intracellular metabolic status.

23068608|a|CHK1 regulates the DNA damage-induced checkpoint involving an ATR- or ATM- dependent pathway. In this paper, we focused on the autophosphorylation of Ser296, one of the DNA damage-induced phosphorylation sites. First, we demonstrated that the Ser296 autophosphorylation of CHK1 is mainly regulated by an intramolecular mechanism in response to DNA damage. In examining the relationship between Ser296 and Ser317/Ser345, the other ATR dependent phosphorylation sites, we found that the Ser296 cis-autophosphorylation was dependent on both Ser317 and Ser345 phosphorylation. Our findings suggest that CHK1 mediates cell cycle checkpoint signals by both cis-autophosphorylation and trans-phosphorylation of downstream factors.

22909821|a|Following genotoxic stress, cells activate a complex signalling network to arrest the cell cycle and initiate DNA repair or apoptosis. The tumour suppressor p53 lies at the heart of this DNA damage response. However, it remains incompletely understood, which signalling molecules dictate the choice between these different cellular outcomes. Here, we identify the transcriptional regulator apoptosis-antagonizing transcription factor (AATF)/Che-1 as a critical regulator of the cellular outcome of the p53 response. Upon genotoxic stress, AATF is phosphorylated by the checkpoint kinase MK2. Phosphorylation results in the release of AATF from cytoplasmic MRLC3 and subsequent nuclear translocation where AATF binds to the PUMA, BAX and BAK promoter regions to repress p53-driven expression of these pro-apoptotic genes. In xenograft experiments, mice exhibit a dramatically enhanced response of AATF-depleted tumours following genotoxic chemotherapy with adriamycin. The exogenous expression of a phospho-mimicking AATF point mutant results in marked adriamycin resistance in vivo. Nuclear AATF enrichment appears to be selected for in p53-proficient endometrial cancers. Furthermore, focal copy number gains at the AATF locus in neuroblastoma, which is known to be almost exclusively p53-proficient, correlate with an adverse prognosis and reduced overall survival. These data identify the p38/MK2/AATF signalling module as a critical repressor of p53-driven apoptosis and commend this pathway as a target for DNA damage-sensitizing therapeutic regimens.

23071334|a|Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) play important roles in several cellular processes, including signaling, gene regulation, and transport of proteins and nucleic acids, to impact growth, differentiation, proliferation, and development. PRMT5 symmetrically di-methylates the two-terminal ω-guanidino nitrogens of arginine residues on substrate proteins. PRMT5 acts as part of a multimeric complex in concert with a variety of partner proteins that regulate its function and specificity. A core component of these complexes is the WD40 protein MEP50/WDR77/p44, which mediates interactions with binding partners and substrates. We have determined the crystal structure of human PRMT5 in complex with MEP50 (methylosome protein 50), bound to an S-adenosylmethionine analog and a peptide substrate derived from histone H4. The structure of the surprising hetero-octameric complex reveals the close interaction between the seven-bladed β-propeller MEP50 and the N-terminal domain of PRMT5, and delineates the structural elements of substrate recognition.

23019610|a|Mitotic divisions result from the oscillating activity of cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1). Cdk1 activity is terminated by the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), a ubiquitin ligase that targets cyclin B for destruction. In somatic divisions, the early mitotic inhibitor 1 (Emi1) and the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) regulate cell cycle progression by inhibiting the APC/C. Early embryonic divisions lack these APC/C-inhibitory components, which raises the question of how those cycles are controlled. We found that the APC/C-inhibitory activity of XErp1 (also known as Emi2) was essential for early divisions in Xenopus embryos. Loss of XErp1 resulted in untimely destruction of APC/C substrates and embryonic lethality. XErp1's APC/C-inhibitory function was negatively regulated by Cdk1 and positively by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). Thus, Cdk1 and PP2A operate at the core of early mitotic cell cycles by antagonistically controlling XErp1 activity, which results in oscillating APC/C activity.

23063561|a|Multidomain proteins incorporating interaction domains are central to regulation of cellular processes. The elucidation of structural organization and mechanistic insights into many of these proteins, however, remain challenging due to their inherent flexibility. Here, we describe the organization and function of four interaction domains in PLCγ1 using a combination of structural biology and biochemical approaches. Intramolecular interactions within the regulatory region center on the cSH2 domain, the only domain that also interacts with the PLC-core. In the context of fibroblast growth-factor receptor signaling, the coordinated involvement of nSH2 and cSH2 domains mediates efficient phosphorylation of PLCγ1 resulting in the interruption of an autoinhibitory interface by direct competition and, independently, dissociation of PLCγ1 from the receptor. Further structural insights into the autoinhibitory surfaces provide a framework to interpret gain-of-function mutations in PLCγ isoforms linked to immune disorders and illustrate a distinct mechanism for regulation of PLC activity by common interaction domains.

22940584|a|Regulation of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) is controlled by a diverse array of regulatory proteins. However, how these proteins direct PP1 specificity is not well understood. More than one-third of the nuclear pool of PP1 forms a holoenzyme with the nuclear inhibitor of PP1, NIPP1, to regulate chromatin remodeling, among other essential biological functions. Here, we show that the PP1-binding domain of NIPP1 is an intrinsically disordered protein, which binds PP1 in an unexpected manner. NIPP1 forms an α helix that engages PP1 at a unique interaction site, using polar rather than hydrophobic contacts. Importantly, the structure also reveals a shared PP1 interaction site outside of the RVxF motif, the ΦΦ motif. Finally, we show that NIPP1:PP1 substrate selectivity is determined by altered electrostatics and enhanced substrate localization. Together, our results provide the molecular basis by which NIPP1 directs PP1 substrate specificity in the nucleus.

22885324|a|Histone gene transcription is actively downregulated after completion of DNA synthesis to avoid overproduction. However, the precise mechanistic details of the cessation of histone mRNA synthesis are not clear. We found that histone H2B phosphorylation at Tyr37 occurs upstream of histone cluster 1, Hist1, during the late S phase. We identified WEE1 as the kinase that phosphorylates H2B at Tyr37. Loss of expression or inhibition of WEE1 kinase abrogated H2B Tyr37 phosphorylation with a concomitant increase in histone transcription in yeast and mammalian cells. H2B Tyr37 phosphorylation excluded binding of the transcriptional coactivator NPAT and RNA polymerase II and recruited the histone chaperone HIRA upstream of the Hist1 cluster. Taken together, our data show a previously unknown and evolutionarily conserved function for WEE1 kinase as an epigenetic modulator that marks chromatin with H2B Tyr37 phosphorylation, thereby inhibiting the transcription of multiple histone genes to lower the burden on the histone mRNA turnover machinery.

22820988|a|The protein tyrosine kinase JAK2 mediates signaling through numerous cytokine receptors. JAK2 possesses a pseudokinase domain (JH2) and a tyrosine kinase domain (JH1). Through unknown mechanisms, JH2 regulates the catalytic activity of JH1, and hyperactivating mutations in the JH2 region of human JAK2 cause myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). We showed previously that JAK2 JH2 is, in fact, catalytically active. Here we present crystal structures of human JAK2 JH2, including both wild type and the most prevalent MPN mutant, V617F. The structures reveal that JH2 adopts the fold of a prototypical protein kinase but binds Mg-ATP noncanonically. The structural and biochemical data indicate that the V617F mutation rigidifies α-helix C in the N lobe of JH2, facilitating trans-phosphorylation of JH1. The crystal structures of JH2 afford new opportunities for the design of novel JAK2 therapeutics targeting MPNs.

22975381|a|Twist proteins have been shown to contribute to cancer development and progression by impinging on different regulatory pathways, but their mechanism of action is poorly defined. By investigating the role of Twist in sarcomas, we found that Twist1 acts as a mechanism alternative to TP53 mutation and MDM2 overexpression to inactivate p53 in mesenchymal tumors. We provide evidence that Twist1 binds p53 C terminus through the Twist box. This interaction hinders key posttranslational modifications of p53 and facilitates its MDM2-mediated degradation. Our study suggests the existence of a Twist box code of p53 inactivation and provides the proof of principle that targeting the Twist box:p53 interaction might offer additional avenues for cancer treatment.

22952686|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 1 and 2 (LRRK1 and LRRK2) are large multidomain proteins containing kinase, GTPase and multiple protein-protein interaction domains, but only mutations in LRRK2 are linked to familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Independent studies suggest that LRRK2 exists in the cell as a complex compatible with the size of a dimer. However, whether this complex is truly a homodimer or a heterologous complex formed by monomeric LRRK2 with other proteins has not been definitively proven due to the limitations in obtaining highly pure proteins suitable for structural characterization. Here, we used stable expression of LRRK1 and LRRK2 in HEK293T cell lines to produce recombinant LRRK1 and LRRK2 proteins of greater than 90% purity. Both purified LRRKs are folded, with a predominantly alpha-helical secondary structure and are capable of binding GTP with similar affinity. Furthermore, recombinant LRRK2 exhibits robust autophosphorylation activity, phosphorylation of model peptides in vitro and ATP binding. In contrast, LRRK1 does not display significant autophosphorylation activity and fails to phosphorylate LRRK2 model substrates, although it does bind ATP. Using these biochemically validated proteins, we show that LRRK1 and LRRK2 are capable of forming homodimers as shown by single-particle transmission electron microscopy and immunogold labeling. These LRRK dimers display an elongated conformation with a mean particle size of 145 Å and 175 Å respectively, which is disrupted by addition of 6M guanidinium chloride. Immunogold staining revealed double-labeled particles also in the pathological LRRK2 mutant G2019S and artificial mutants disrupting GTPase and kinase activities, suggesting that point mutations do not hinder the dimeric conformation. Overall, our findings indicate for the first time that purified and active LRRK1 and LRRK2 can form dimers in their full-length conformation.

24485452|a|The response to DNA damage, which regulates nuclear processes such as DNA repair, transcription, and cell cycle, has been studied thoroughly. However, the cytoplasmic response to DNA damage is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that DNA damage triggers dramatic reorganization of the Golgi, resulting in its dispersal throughout the cytoplasm. We further show that DNA-damage-induced Golgi dispersal requires GOLPH3/MYO18A/F-actin and the DNA damage protein kinase, DNA-PK. In response to DNA damage, DNA-PK phosphorylates GOLPH3, resulting in increased interaction with MYO18A, which applies a tensile force to the Golgi. Interference with the Golgi DNA damage response by depletion of DNA-PK, GOLPH3, or MYO18A reduces survival after DNA damage, whereas overexpression of GOLPH3, as is observed frequently in human cancers, confers resistance to killing by DNA-damaging agents. Identification of the DNA-damage-induced Golgi response reveals an unexpected pathway through DNA-PK, GOLPH3, and MYO18A that regulates cell survival following DNA damage. 

24535599|a|Growth factor receptor-bound protein 14 (Grb14) interacts with insulin receptor (IR) through the between PH and SH2 (BPS) domain. Grb14-IR complex formation is initiated by insulin stimulation, and the binding event results in the inhibition of insulin signalling. Thus, Grb14 is regarded as an endogenous suppressor of insulin signal transduction; however, there are no studies describing the mechanism whereby Grb14-IR complex formation is suppressed in the absence of insulin stimulation. In the present study, multiple phosphorylation motifs for glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) were identified within the Grb14 BPS domain (Ser(358), Ser(362) and Ser(366) of human Grb14). Pharmacological inhibition as well as knockdown of GSK-3 facilitated complex formation between Grb14 and IR, implicating GSK-3 activity in regulating Grb14-IR binding. In situ proximity ligation assay and in vitro kinase assays of phosphopeptides suggested that serine residues in the BPS domain would be substrates for GSK-3. The kinase assays also indicated phosphoserine 370 (in human Grb14) was required for the phosphorylation of Ser(358), Ser(362) and Ser(366) by GSK-3. Grb14-IR binding was also facilitated by replacement of the serines with Ala. We also observed that Ser(366) of endogenous Grb14 in Hep G2 cell was phosphorylated and the phosphorylation was influenced by treatments with insulin, as well as the GSK-3 inhibitor.

24656772|a|Hypoxic stress and hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) play important roles in a wide range of tumors. We demonstrate that SPOP, which encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase component, is a direct transcriptional target of HIFs in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Furthermore, hypoxia results in cytoplasmic accumulation of SPOP, which is sufficient to induce tumorigenesis. This tumorigenic activity occurs through the ubiquitination and degradation of multiple regulators of cellular proliferation and apoptosis, including the tumor suppressor PTEN, ERK phosphatases, the proapoptotic molecule Daxx, and the Hedgehog pathway transcription factor Gli2. Knockdown of SPOP specifically kills ccRCC cells, indicating that it may be a promising therapeutic target. Collectively, our results indicate that SPOP serves as a regulatory hub to promote ccRCC tumorigenesis. 

24525236|a|Cooperative dependencies between mutant oncoproteins and wild-type proteins are critical in cancer pathogenesis and therapy resistance. Although spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) has been implicated in hematologic malignancies, it is rarely mutated. We used kinase activity profiling to identify collaborators of SYK in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and determined that FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is transactivated by SYK via direct binding. Highly activated SYK is predominantly found in FLT3-ITD positive AML and cooperates with FLT3-ITD to activate MYC transcriptional programs. FLT3-ITD AML cells are more vulnerable to SYK suppression than FLT3 wild-type counterparts. In a FLT3-ITD in vivo model, SYK is indispensable for myeloproliferative disease (MPD) development, and SYK overexpression promotes overt transformation to AML and resistance to FLT3-ITD-targeted therapy.

24525235|a|Twist is a key transcription activator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). It remains unclear how Twist induces gene expression. Here we report a mechanism by which Twist recruits BRD4 to direct WNT5A expression in basal-like breast cancer (BLBC). Twist contains a "histone H4-mimic" GK-X-GK motif that is diacetylated by Tip60. The diacetylated Twist binds the second bromodomain of BRD4, whose first bromodomain interacts with acetylated H4, thereby constructing an activated Twist/BRD4/P-TEFb/RNA-Pol II complex at the WNT5A promoter and enhancer. Pharmacologic inhibition of the Twist-BRD4 association reduced WNT5A expression and suppressed invasion, cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties, and tumorigenicity of BLBC cells. Our study indicates that the interaction with BRD4 is critical for the oncogenic function of Twist in BLBC. 

23079656|a|D-type cyclins form complexes with cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK4/6) and promote cell cycle progression. Although cyclin D functions appear largely tissue specific, we demonstrate that cyclin D3 has unique functions in lymphocyte development and cannot be replaced by cyclin D2, which is also expressed during blood differentiation. We show that only combined deletion of p27(Kip1) and retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (Rb) is sufficient to rescue the development of Ccnd3(-/-) thymocytes. Furthermore, we show that a small molecule targeting the kinase function of cyclin D3:CDK4/6 inhibits both cell cycle entry in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and disease progression in animal models of T-ALL. These studies identify unique functions for cyclin D3:CDK4/6 complexes and suggest potential therapeutic protocols for this devastating blood tumor.

24548923|a|Previous studies from our group and others have shown that the Akt kinase can contribute to induction of NF-κB by antigen receptor signaling. However, the direct targets of Akt in this pathway are not known. Here we show that Akt-mediated NF-κB activation is mediated at least in part through direct phosphorylation of the adaptor protein Carma1, which we previously demonstrated could interact with Akt in a TCR ligation-dependent manner. The putative Akt phosphorylation sites in Carma1 are distinct from known PKC consensus sites. Mutation of S551, S637 and S645 in Carma1 to non-phosphorylatable residues decreased phosphorylation of GST-Carma1-linker construct by Akt in vitro. In addition, Carma1 S637A/S645A mutants were significantly impaired in their ability to restore TCR-mediated NF-κB activation and IL-2 expression in Carma1-deficient T cells. Thus, our data reveal Carma1 as a novel target for Akt phosphorylation and suggest that Akt-mediated phosphorylation of Carma1 is an additional regulatory mechanism tuning the NF-κB response downstream of antigen receptor and co-stimulatory signaling.

24605759|a|Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels play a central role in the regulation of cardiac and neuronal firing rate, and these channels can be dually activated by membrane hyperpolarization and by binding of cyclic nucleotides. cAMP has been shown to directly bind HCN channels and modulate their activity. Despite this, while there are selective inhibitors that block the activation potential of the HCN channels, regulation by cAMP analogs has not been well investigated. A comprehensive screen of 47 cyclic nucleotides with modifications in the nucleobase, ribose moiety, and cyclic phosphate was tested on the three isoforms HCN1, HCN2, and HCN4. 7-CH-cAMP was identified to be a high affinity binder for HCN channels and crosschecked for its ability to act on other cAMP receptor proteins. While 7-CH-cAMP is a general activator for cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinases as well as for the guanine nucleotide exchange factors Epac1 and Epac2, it displays the highest affinity to HCN channels. The molecular basis of the high affinity was investigated by determining the crystal structure of 7-CH-cAMP in complex with the cyclic nucleotide binding domain of HCN4. Electrophysiological studies demonstrate a strong activation potential of 7-CH-cAMP for the HCN4 channel in vivo. So, this makes 7-CH-cAMP a promising activator of the HCN channels in vitro whose functionality can be translated in living cells. 

22998870|a|LRRK2 is a kinase mutated in Parkinson's disease, but how the protein affects synaptic function remains enigmatic. We identified LRRK2 as a critical regulator of EndophilinA. Using genetic and biochemical studies involving Lrrk loss-of-function mutants and Parkinson-related LRRK2(G2019S) gain-of-kinase function, we show that LRRK2 affects synaptic endocytosis by phosphorylating EndoA at S75, a residue in the BAR domain. We show that LRRK2-mediated EndoA phosphorylation has profound effects on EndoA-dependent membrane tubulation and membrane association in vitro and in vivo and on synaptic vesicle endocytosis at Drosophila neuromuscular junctions in vivo. Our work uncovers a regulatory mechanism that indicates that reduced LRRK2 kinase activity facilitates EndoA membrane association, while increased kinase activity inhibits membrane association. Consequently, both too much and too little LRRK2-dependent EndoA phosphorylation impedes synaptic endocytosis, and we propose a model in which LRRK2 kinase activity is part of an EndoA phosphorylation cycle that facilitates efficient vesicle formation at synapses.

15385968|a|Nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) is the major DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair pathway in mammalian cells. A critical step in this process is DNA ligation, involving the Xrcc4-DNA ligase IV complex. DNA end processing is often a prerequisite for ligation, but the coordination of these events is poorly understood. We show that polynucleotide kinase (PNK), with its ability to process ionizing radiation-induced 5'-OH and 3'-phosphate DNA termini, functions in NHEJ via an FHA-dependent interaction with CK2-phosphorylated Xrcc4. Analysis of the PNK FHA-Xrcc4 interaction revealed that the PNK FHA domain binds phosphopeptides with a unique selectivity among FHA domains. Disruption of the Xrcc4-PNK interaction in vivo is associated with increased radiosensitivity and slower repair kinetics of DSBs, in conjunction with a diminished efficiency of DNA end joining in vitro. Therefore, these results suggest a new role for Xrcc4 in the coordination of DNA end processing with DNA ligation.

15367657|a|DNA single-strand break repair (SSBR) is important for maintaining genome stability and homeostasis. The current SSBR model derived from an in vitro-reconstituted reaction suggests that the SSBR complex mediated by X-ray repair cross-complementing protein 1 (XRCC1) is assembled sequentially at the site of damage. In this study, we provide biochemical data to demonstrate that two preformed XRCC1 protein complexes exist in cycling HeLa cells. One complex contains known enzymes that are important for SSBR, including DNA ligase 3 (DNL3), polynucleotide kinase 3'-phosphatase, and polymerase beta; the other is a new complex that contains DNL3 and the ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 (AOA) gene product aprataxin. We report the characterization of the new XRCC1 complex. XRCC1 is phosphorylated in vivo and in vitro by CK2, and CK2 phosphorylation of XRCC1 on S518, T519, and T523 largely determines aprataxin binding to XRCC1 though its FHA domain. An acute loss of aprataxin by small interfering RNA renders HeLa cells sensitive to methyl methanesulfonate treatment by a mechanism of shortened half-life of XRCC1. Thus, aprataxin plays a role to maintain the steady-state protein level of XRCC1. Collectively, these data provide insights into the SSBR molecular machinery in the cell and point to the involvement of aprataxin in SSBR, thus linking SSBR to the neurological disease AOA.

15356145|a|IL-2 stimulation of T lymphocytes induces the tyrosine phosphorylation and adaptor function of the insulin receptor substrate/Grb2-associated binder (Gab) family member, Gab2. In addition, Gab2 undergoes a marked decrease in its mobility in SDS-PAGE, characteristic of migration shifts induced by serine/threonine phosphorylations in many proteins. This migration shift was strongly diminished by treating cells with the MEK inhibitor U0126, indicating a possible role for ERK in Gab2 phosphorylation. Indeed, ERK phosphorylated Gab2 on a consensus phosphorylation site at serine 623, a residue located between tyrosine 614 and tyrosine 643 that are responsible for Gab2/Src homology 2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase (SHP)-2 interaction. We report that pretreatment of Kit 225 cells with U0126 increased Gab2/SHP-2 association and tyrosine phosphorylation of SHP-2 in response to IL-2, suggesting that ERK phosphorylation of serine 623 regulates the interaction between Gab2 and SHP-2, and consequently the activity of SHP-2. This hypothesis was confirmed by biochemical analysis of cells expressing Gab2 WT, Gab2 serine 623A or Gab2 tyrosine 614F, a mutant that cannot interact with SHP-2 in response to IL-2. Activation of the ERK pathway was indeed blocked by Gab2 tyrosine 614F and slightly increased by Gab2 serine 623A. In contrast, STAT5 activation was strongly enhanced by Gab2 tyrosine 614F, slightly reduced by Gab2 WT and strongly inhibited by Gab2 serine 623A. Analysis of the rate of proliferation of cells expressing these mutants of Gab2 demonstrated that tyrosine 614F mutation enhanced proliferation whereas serine 623A diminished it. These results demonstrate that ERK-mediated phosphorylation of Gab2 serine 623 is involved in fine tuning the proliferative response of T lymphocytes to IL-2.

15251452|a|The interaction of the chemokine receptor, CCR5, expressed in recombinant cells, with different G proteins was investigated and CCR5 was found to interact with Gi, Go and Gq species. Interaction with Gi leads to G protein activation, whereas Gq does not seem to be activated. Additionally, CCR5 activation also leads to phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2). Activation of JAK2 is independent of Gi or Gq activation. Gi protein activation was not prevented by inhibition of JAK, showing that heterotrimeric G protein activation and activation of the JAK/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway are independent of each other.

15322554|a|The tyrosine phosphatase PTP-MEG2 is targeted by its amino-terminal Sec14p homology domain to the membrane of secretory vesicles. There it regulates vesicle size by promoting homotypic vesicle fusion by a mechanism that requires its catalytic activity. Here, we identify N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF), a key regulator of vesicle fusion, as a substrate for PTP-MEG2. PTP-MEG2 reduced the phosphotyrosine content of NSF and co-localized with NSF and syntaxin 6 in intact cells. Furthermore, endogenous PTP-MEG2 co-immunoprecipitated with endogenous NSF. Phosphorylation of NSF at Tyr 83, as well as an acidic substitution at the same site, increased its ATPase activity and prevented alphaSNAP binding. Conversely, expression of a Y83F mutant of NSF caused spontaneous fusion events. Our results suggest that the molecular mechanism by which PTP-MEG2 promotes secretory vesicle fusion involves the local release of NSF from a tyrosine-phosphorylated, inactive state. This represents a novel mechanism for localized regulation of NSF and the first demonstrated role for a protein tyrosine phosphatase in the regulated secretory pathway.

15314064|a|Keratins 8 and 18 (K8/18) heteropolymers may regulate cell signaling via the known K18 association with 14-3-3 proteins and 14-3-3 association with Raf-1 kinase. We characterized Raf-keratin-14-3-3 associations and show that Raf associates directly with K8, independent of Raf kinase activity or Ras-Raf interaction, and that K18 is a Raf physiologic substrate. Raf activation during oxidative and toxin exposure in cultured cells and animals disrupt keratin-Raf association in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Mutational analysis showed that 14-3-3 residues that are essential for Raf binding also regulate 14-3-3-keratin association. Similarly, Raf phosphorylation sites that are important for binding to 14-3-3 are also essential for Raf binding to K8/18. Therefore, keratins may modulate some aspects of Raf signaling under basal conditions via sequestration by K8, akin to Raf-14-3-3 binding. Keratin-bound Raf kinase is released upon Raf hyperphosphorylation and activation during oxidative and other stresses.

15467457|a|It is thought that G(1) cyclin/CDK mediated phosphorylation of pocket proteins from mid G(1) to mitosis is reversed via dephosphorylation in mitosis. We examined the mechanisms involved in the unexpectedly rapid dephosphorylation of the pocket proteins induced via inhibition of cellular protein synthesis by cycloheximide (CHX) as well as direct inhibition of CDKs by flavopiridol. CHX and flavopiridol-induced dephosphorylation of pocket proteins is attributable to inactivation of D-type cyclin/CDKs and G(1)/S CDKs, respectively, which unmasks a phosphatase activity that targets the three pocket proteins apparently throughout the cell cycle. Treatment of cells with phosphatase inhibitors at concentrations selective for PP2A inhibition prevents CHX and flavopiridol-mediated dephosphorylation of pocket proteins in vivo. Also, ectopic expression of SV40 small t antigen, which inhibits PP2A via disruption of trimeric PP2A holoenzymes, delays CHX-induced pocket protein dephosphorylation. Moreover, dephosphorylation of p130 and p107 in cell extracts is inhibited by concentrations of okadaic acid known to inhibit PP2A, but not PP1. Finally, the PP2A catalytic subunit (PP2A/C) specifically interacts with both p130 and p107 in quiescent cells as well as cells progressing throughout the cell cycle. Together, these results demonstrate that the overall phosphorylation state of pocket proteins is determined, at least in part, by a dynamic equilibrium between CDKs and PP2A, or a closely related PP2A-like enzyme. These findings have important implications, as cell cycle or checkpoint-dependent inhibition of CDK activities counteracted by an active PP2A should have imminent effects on the phosphorylation state and activities of pocket proteins.

15364941|a|The hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5B protein is the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase required for replication of the HCV RNA genome. We have identified a peptide that most closely resembles a short region of the protein kinase C-related kinase 2 (PRK2) by screening of a random 12-mer peptide library displayed on the surface of the M13 bacteriophage with NS5B proteins immobilized on microwell plates. Competitive phage enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with a synthetic peptide showed that the phage clone displaying this peptide could bind HCV RNA polymerase with a high affinity. Coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization studies demonstrated in vivo interaction of NS5B with PRK2. In vitro kinase assays demonstrated that PRK2 specifically phosphorylates NS5B by interaction with the N-terminal finger domain of NS5B (amino acids 1-187). Consistent with the in vitro NS5B-phosphorylating activity of PRK2, we detected the phosphorylated form of NS5B by metabolic cell labeling. Furthermore, HCV NS5B immunoprecipitated from HCV subgenomic replicon cells was specifically recognized by an antiphosphoserine antibody. Knock-down of the endogenous PRK2 expression using a PRK2-specific small interfering RNA inhibited HCV RNA replication. In contrast, PRK2 overexpression, which was accompanied by an increase of in the level of its active form, dramatically enhanced HCV RNA replication. Altogether, our results indicate that HCV RNA replication is regulated by NS5B phosphorylation by PRK2.

15380617|a|Chk2 is a key player of the DNA damage signalling pathway. To identify new regulators of this kinase, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen and found that Chk2 associated with the B' regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase PP2A. In vitro GST-Chk2 pulldowns demonstrated that B'gamma isoforms bound to Chk2 with the strongest apparent affinity. This was confirmed in cellulo by co-immunoprecipitation after overexpression of the respective partners in HEK293 cells. The A and C subunits of PP2A were present in the complexes, suggesting that Chk2 was associated with a functionnal PP2A. In vitro kinase assays showed that B'gamma3 was a potent Chk2 substrate. This phosphorylation increased the catalytic phosphatase activity of PP2A measured on MAP kinase-phosphorylated myelin basic protein as well as on autophosphorylated Chk2. Finally, we demonstrated that overexpressing B'gamma3 in HEK293 suppressed the phosphorylation of Chk2 induced by a genotoxic treatment, suggesting that PP2A may counteract the action of the checkpoint kinase in living cells.

15452250|a|Using a yeast two-hybrid screen of a T-cell cDNA library to identify cellular proteins that bind to the human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) Gag polyprotein, we identified PRP4, a serine-threonine protein kinase. Specific interaction of PRP4 and HIV-2 Gag was confirmed in in vitro and in vivo assays. The interacting region of HIV-2 Gag is located in the conserved matrix and capsid domains, while both the RS (arginine-serine-rich) domain and the KS (kinase) domain of PRP4 are able to bind to HIV-2 Gag. PRP4 is not incorporated into virus particles. HIV-2 Gag is able to inhibit PRP4-mediated phosphorylation of the splicing factor SF2. This is also observed with Gag from simian immunodeficiency virus, a closely related virus, but not with Gag from human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1. Our results provide evidence for a novel interaction between Gag and a cellular protein kinase involved in the control of constitutive splicing in two closely related retroviruses. We hypothesize that as Gag accumulates in the cell, down regulation of splicing occurs through reduced phosphorylation of SF2. At late stages of infection, this interaction may replace the function of the early viral regulatory protein Rev.

15494309|a|Cytoplasmic assembly of Sm-class small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) is a central process in eukaryotic gene expression. A large macromolecular complex containing the survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein is required for proper snRNP assembly in vivo. Defects in SMN function lead to a human neuromuscular disorder, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). SMN protein localizes to both nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments, and a reduction in nuclear levels of SMN is correlated with the disease. The mechanism of SMN nuclear import, however, is unknown. Using digitonin-permeabilized cells, we show that SMN import depends on the presence of Sm snRNPs. Conversely, import of labeled U1 snRNPs was SMN complex dependent. Thus, import of SMN and U snRNPs are coupled in vitro. Furthermore, we identify nuclear import defects in SMA patient-derived SMN mutants, uncovering a potential mechanism for SMN dysfunction.

15378002|a|The VRK1 kinase is a novel Ser-Thr kinase in the human kinome that diverged from the casein kinase 1 branch. These kinases phosphorylate transcription factors related to stress responses, such as p53. In this report we have studied the phosphorylation of the transcription factor c-Jun in its N-terminal region. The VRK1 protein phosphorylates c-Jun with a Km of 0.4 muM, and is not inhibited by SP600125. VRK1 phosphorylates c-Jun in Ser63 and Ser73 in vitro, the same residues targeted by the N-terminal kinase of c-Jun (JNK). This phosphorylation induces the stabilization and accumulation of the c-Jun protein. VRK1 phosphorylates the endogenous c-Jun in Ser63. VRK1 activates c-Jun dependent transcription, which is dependent on phosphorylation of Ser63 and Ser73. The c-Jun with Ser63Ala and Ser73Ala substitutions is not transcriptionally active when cotransfected with VRK1. VRK1 interacts with c-Jun but not with JNK. The cotransfection of VRK1 and JNK has an additive effect on the transcriptional activation of c-Jun indicating that they can cooperate when both are at suboptimal dose; otherwise, maximum effect by one of them prevents the effect of the other. The VRK1-c-Jun connection represents a component of a new signaling pathway whose upstream elements remain to be identified.

15302858|a|Both in Drosophila and vertebrate epithelial cells, the establishment of apicobasal polarity requires the apically localized, membrane-associated Par-3-Par-6-aPKC protein complex. In Drosophila, this complex colocalizes with the Crumbs-Stardust (Sdt)-Pals1-associated TJ protein (Patj) complex. Genetic and molecular analyses suggest a functional relationship between them. We show, by overexpression of a kinase-dead Drosophila atypical PKC (DaPKC), the requirement for the kinase activity of DaPKC to maintain the position of apical determinants and to restrict the localization of basolateral ones. We demonstrate a novel physical interaction between the apical complexes, via direct binding of DaPKC to both Crb and Patj, and identify Crumbs as a phosphorylation target of DaPKC. This phosphorylation of Crumbs is functionally significant. Thus, a nonphosphorylatable Crumbs protein behaves in vivo as a dominant negative. Moreover, the phenotypic effect of overexpressing wild-type Crumbs is suppressed by reducing DaPKC activity. These results provide a mechanistic framework for the functional interaction between the Par-3-Par-6-aPKC and Crumbs-Sdt-Patj complexes based in the posttranslational modification of Crb by DaPKC.

19914239|a|Recently, it was reported that the product of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome gene (folliculin, FLCN) is directly phosphorylated by 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). In this study, we identified serine 62 (Ser62) as a phosphorylation site in FLCN and generated an anti-phospho-Ser62-FLCN antibody. Our analysis suggests that Ser62 phosphorylation is indirectly up-regulated by AMPK and that another residue is directly phosphorylated by AMPK. By binding with FLCN-interacting proteins (FNIP1 and FNIP2/FNIPL), Ser62 phosphorylation is increased. A phospho-mimic mutation at Ser62 enhanced the formation of the FLCN-AMPK complex. These results suggest that function(s) of FLCN-AMPK-FNIP complex is regulated by Ser62 phosphorylation.

19755121|a|Overexpression of Regulator of Calcineurin 1 (RCAN1/DSCR1/Adapt78) is known to inhibit the calcineurin-NFAT dependent signaling pathway. In this report, we find that activation of adenylate cyclase by forskolin increases the expression of RCAN1 through the increase of the protein's half-life. The ability of forskolin to increase the accumulation of RCAN1 protein is significantly inhibited with protein kinase A inhibitors such as KT5720 and H-89. Furthermore, forskolin targets the central and C-terminal region of RCAN1 and enhances the inhibitory effect of RCAN1 on the calcineurin-mediated activation of NFAT. Our findings provide the first evidence that the accumulation of the RCAN1 protein by cAMP acts as an important regulatory mechanism in the control of the calcineurin-dependent cellular pathway.

19691494|a|The regulation of protein expression on the cell surface membrane is an important component of the cellular response to extracellular signalling. The translation of extracellular signalling into specific protein localization often involves the post-translational modification of cargo proteins. Using a genetic screen of random peptides, we have previously identified a group of C-terminal sequences, represented by RGRSWTY-COOH (termed'SWTY'), which are capable of overriding an endoplasmic reticulum localization signal and directing membrane proteins to the cell surface via specific binding to 14-3-3 proteins. The identity of the kinase signalling pathways that drive phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding of the SWTY sequence is not known. In this study, we report that the activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) pathway by the over-expression of active kinases, stimulation with fetal bovine serum or growth factors can: (a) phosphorylate the SWTY sequence; (b) recruit 14-3-3 proteins to SWTY; and (c) promote surface expression of the chimeric potassium channel fused with the SWTY sequence. The expression of the dominant negative Akt inhibited the enhancement of surface expression by fetal bovine serum. In addition, the activation of PI3K significantly enhanced the 14-3-3 association and cell surface expression of GPR15, a G protein-coupled receptor which carries an endogenous SWTY-like, C-terminal, 14-3-3 binding sequence and is known to serve as a HIV co-receptor. Given the wealth and specificity of both kinase activity and 14-3-3 binding sequences, our results suggest that the C-terminal SWTYlike motif may serve as a sensor that can selectively induce the cell surface expression of membrane proteins in response to different extracellular signals.

19883655|a|mAKAPbeta is the scaffold for a multimolecular signaling complex in cardiac myocytes that is required for the induction of neonatal myocyte hypertrophy. We now show that the pro-hypertrophic phosphatase calcineurin binds directly to a single site on mAKAPbeta that does not conform to any of the previously reported consensus binding sites. Calcineurin-mAKAPbeta complex formation is increased in the presence of Ca(2+)/calmodulin and in norepinephrine-stimulated primary cardiac myocytes. This binding is of functional significance because myocytes exhibit diminished norepinephrine-stimulated hypertrophy when expressing a mAKAPbeta mutant incapable of binding calcineurin. In addition to calcineurin, the transcription factor NFATc3 also associates with the mAKAPbeta scaffold in myocytes. Calcineurin bound to mAKAPbeta can dephosphorylate NFATc3 in myocytes, and expression of mAKAPbeta is required for NFAT transcriptional activity. Taken together, our results reveal the importance of regulated calcineurin binding to mAKAPbeta for the induction of cardiac myocyte hypertrophy. Furthermore, these data illustrate how scaffold proteins organizing localized signaling complexes provide the molecular architecture for signal transduction networks regulating key cellular processes.

19833129|a|The E3 ubiqutin ligase, murne double-minute clone 2 (MDM2), promotes the degradation of p53 under normal homeostatic conditions. Several serine residues within the acidic domain of MDM2 are phosphorylated to maintain its activity but become hypo-phosphorylated following DNA damage, leading to inactivation of MDM2 and induction of p53. However, the signalling pathways that mediate these phosphorylation events are not fully understood. Here we show that the oncogenic and cell cycle-regulatory protein kinase, polo-like kinase-1 (PLK1), phosphorylates MDM2 at one of these residues, Ser260, and stimulates MDM2-mediated turnover of p53. These data are consistent with the idea that deregulation of PLK1 during tumourigenesis may help suppress p53 function.

19864627|a|NF-kappaB is a key activator of inflammatory and immune responses with important pathological roles in cancer, heart disease, and autoimmune diseases. Transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB is regulated by different posttranslational modifications. Here, we report a novel mechanism of NF-kappaB regulation through lysine monomethylation by SET9 methyltransferase. Set9 specifically methylates p65 at lysine 37. Both TNFalpha and IL-1beta treatments induced methylation of p65. Methylated p65 is restricted to the nucleus and this modification regulates the promoter binding of p65. Moreover, Set9 mediated methylation of p65 is required for the expression of a subset of NF-kappaB target genes in response to TNFalpha stimulation.

19706541|a|Cancer cells often display defects in mitochondrial respiration, thus the identification of pathways that promote cell survival under this metabolic state may have therapeutic implications. Here, we report that the targeted ablation of mitochondrial respiration markedly increases expression of Polo-like kinase 2 (PLK2) and that it is required for the in vitro growth of these nonrespiring cells. Furthermore, we identify PLK2 as a kinase that phosphorylates Ser-137 of PLK1, which is sufficient to mediate this survival signal. In vivo, knockdown of PLK2 in an isogenic human cell line with a modest defect in mitochondrial respiration eliminates xenograft formation, indicating that PLK2 activity is necessary for growth of cells with compromised respiration. Our findings delineate a mitochondrial dysfunction responsive cell cycle pathway critical for determining cancer cell outcome.

20023629|a|MCL1 is essential for the survival of stem and progenitor cells of multiple lineages, and is unique among pro-survival BCL2 family members in that it is rapidly turned over through the action of ubiquitin ligases. B- and mantle-cell lymphomas, chronic myeloid leukaemia, and multiple myeloma, however, express abnormally high levels of MCL1, contributing to chemoresistance and disease relapse. The mechanism of MCL1 overexpression in cancer is not well understood. Here we show that the deubiquitinase USP9X stabilizes MCL1 and thereby promotes cell survival. USP9X binds MCL1 and removes the Lys 48-linked polyubiquitin chains that normally mark MCL1 for proteasomal degradation. Increased USP9X expression correlates with increased MCL1 protein in human follicular lymphomas and diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Moreover, patients with multiple myeloma overexpressing USP9X have a poor prognosis. Knockdown of USP9X increases MCL1 polyubiquitination, which enhances MCL1 turnover and cell killing by the BH3 mimetic ABT-737. These results identify USP9X as a prognostic and therapeutic target, and they show that deubiquitinases may stabilize labile oncoproteins in human malignancies.

19918049|a|Haspin, a nuclear and chromosome-associated serine/threonine (S/T) kinase, is responsible for mitotic phosphorylation of Thr-3 of histone H3. Haspin bears recognizable similarity to the eukaryotic protein kinase (ePK) fold, but its sequence is highly divergent and there is therefore considerable interest in its structural organization. We report the 2.15-A crystal structure of the kinase domain of human Haspin. The ePK fold of Haspin contains an array of insertions and deletions. The structure illustrates how Haspin escapes the classical activation scheme of most other kinases. The alphaC helix, which bears a conserved glutamate that is essential for catalysis, adopts its final active conformation within the small lobe of the kinase. It is sandwiched between an alpha-helical insertion that precedes the kinase domain, and the activation segment, which adopts an unprecedented conformation. The activation segment, which does not contain phosphorylatable residues, packs against an unusually structured alphaEF helix. Significantly extruded from the core of the fold, it forms an extensive plateau, hosting several residues implicated in substrate binding. Overall, the structure of the Haspin kinase domain reveals an active conformation that is poised for substrate recognition and phosphorylation in the absence of external regulators.

19918057|a|The protein kinase haspin/Gsg2 plays an important role in mitosis, where it specifically phosphorylates Thr-3 in histone H3 (H3T3). Its protein sequence is only weakly homologous to other protein kinases and lacks the highly conserved motifs normally required for kinase activity. Here we report structures of human haspin in complex with ATP and the inhibitor iodotubercidin. These structures reveal a constitutively active kinase conformation, stabilized by haspin-specific inserts. Haspin also has a highly atypical activation segment well adapted for specific recognition of the basic histone tail. Despite the lack of a DFG motif, ATP binding to haspin is similar to that in classical kinases; however, the ATP gamma-phosphate forms hydrogen bonds with the conserved catalytic loop residues Asp-649 and His-651, and a His651Ala haspin mutant is inactive, suggesting a direct role for the catalytic loop in ATP recognition. Enzyme kinetic data show that haspin phosphorylates substrate peptides through a rapid equilibrium random mechanism. A detailed analysis of histone modifications in the neighborhood of H3T3 reveals that increasing methylation at Lys-4 (H3K4) strongly decreases substrate recognition, suggesting a key role of H3K4 methylation in the regulation of haspin activity.

19966800|a|The CagA protein of Helicobacter pylori interacts with numerous cellular factors and is associated with increased virulence and risk of gastric carcinoma. We present here the cocrystal structure of a subdomain of CagA with the human kinase PAR1b/MARK2, revealing that a CagA peptide mimics substrates of this kinase family, resembling eukaryotic protein kinase inhibitors. Mutagenesis of conserved residues central to this interaction renders CagA inactive as an inhibitor of MARK2.

19914168|a|TGF-beta and BMP receptor kinases activate Smad transcription factors by C-terminal phosphorylation. We have identified a subsequent agonist-induced phosphorylation that plays a central dual role in Smad transcriptional activation and turnover. As receptor-activated Smads form transcriptional complexes, they are phosphorylated at an interdomain linker region by CDK8 and CDK9, which are components of transcriptional mediator and elongation complexes. These phosphorylations promote Smad transcriptional action, which in the case of Smad1 is mediated by the recruitment of YAP to the phosphorylated linker sites. An effector of the highly conserved Hippo organ size control pathway, YAP supports Smad1-dependent transcription and is required for BMP suppression of neural differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. The phosphorylated linker is ultimately recognized by specific ubiquitin ligases, leading to proteasome-mediated turnover of activated Smad proteins. Thus, nuclear CDK8/9 drive a cycle of Smad utilization and disposal that is an integral part of canonical BMP and TGF-beta pathways.

19732724|a|In cell lines from advanced lung cancer, breast cancer, and melanoma, endogenous tensin-3 contributes to cell migration, anchorage-independent growth, and tumorigenesis. Although SH2 domains have not been reported previously to be phosphorylated, the tensin-3 SH2 domain is a physiologic substrate for Src. Tyrosines in the SH2 domain contribute to the biological activity of tensin-3, and phosphorylation of these tyrosines can regulate ligand binding. In a mouse breast cancer model, tensin-3 tyrosines are phosphorylated in a Src-associated manner in primary tumors, and experimental metastases induced by tumor-derived cell lines depend on endogenous tensin-3. Thus, tensin-3 is implicated as an oncoprotein regulated by Src and possessing an SH2 domain with a previously undescribed mechanism for the regulation of ligand binding.

19879842|a|DYRKs are kinases that self-activate in vitro by autophosphorylation of a YTY motif in the kinase domain, but their regulation in vivo is not well understood. In C. elegans zygotes, MBK-2/DYRK phosphorylates oocyte proteins at the end of the meiotic divisions to promote the oocyte-to-embryo transition. Here we demonstrate that MBK-2 is under both positive and negative regulation during the transition. MBK-2 is activated during oocyte maturation by CDK-1-dependent phosphorylation of serine 68, a residue outside of the kinase domain required for full activity in vivo. The pseudotyrosine phosphatases EGG-4 and EGG-5 sequester activated MBK-2 until the meiotic divisions by binding to the YTY motif and inhibiting MBK-2's kinase activity directly, using a mixed-inhibition mechanism that does not involve tyrosine dephosphorylation. Our findings link cell-cycle progression to MBK-2/DYRK activation and the oocyte-to-embryo transition.

19733152|a|Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a common cause of inherited Parkinson's disease (PD). The protein is large and complex, but pathogenic mutations cluster in a region containing GTPase and kinase domains. LRRK2 can autophosphorylate in vitro within a dimer pair, although the significance of this reaction is unclear. Here, we mapped the sites of autophosphorylation within LRRK2 and found several potential phosphorylation sites within the GTPase domain. Using mass spectrometry, we found that Thr1343 is phosphorylated and, using kinase dead versions of LRRK2, show that this is an autophosphorylation site. However, we also find evidence for additional sites in the GTPase domain and in other regions of the protein suggesting that there may be multiple autophosphorylation sites within LRRK2. These data suggest that the kinase and GTPase activities of LRRK2 may exhibit complex autoregulatory interdependence.

22863277|a|The Hippo pathway is crucial in organ size control, and its dysregulation contributes to tumorigenesis. However, upstream signals that regulate the mammalian Hippo pathway have remained elusive. Here, we report that the Hippo pathway is regulated by G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. Serum-borne lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine 1-phosphophate (S1P) act through G12/13-coupled receptors to inhibit the Hippo pathway kinases Lats1/2, thereby activating YAP and TAZ transcription coactivators, which are oncoproteins repressed by Lats1/2. YAP and TAZ are involved in LPA-induced gene expression, cell migration, and proliferation. In contrast, stimulation of Gs-coupled receptors by glucagon or epinephrine activates Lats1/2 kinase activity, thereby inhibiting YAP function. Thus, GPCR signaling can either activate or inhibit the Hippo-YAP pathway depending on the coupled G protein. Our study identifies extracellular diffusible signals that modulate the Hippo pathway and also establishes the Hippo-YAP pathway as a critical signaling branch downstream of GPCR.

19712061|a|Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of autosomal-dominant familial and late-onset sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 is a large multi-domain protein featuring a GTP-binding C-terminal of Ras of complex proteins (ROC) (ROCO) domain combination unique for the ROCO protein family, directly followed by a kinase domain. Dimerization is a well-established phenomenon among protein kinases. Here, we confirm LRRK2 self-interaction, and provide evidence for general homo- and heterodimerization potential among the ROCO kinase family (LRRK2, LRRK1, and death-associated protein kinase 1). The ROCO domain was critically, though not exclusively involved in dimerization, as a LRRK2 deletion mutant lacking the ROCO domain retained dimeric properties. GTP binding did not appear to influence ROCO(LRRK2) self-interaction. Interestingly, ROCO(LRRK2) fragments exerted an inhibitory effect on both wild-type and the elevated G2019S LRRK2 autophosphorylation activity. Insertion of PD mutations into ROCO(LRRK2) reduced self-interaction and led to a reduction of LRRK2 kinase inhibition. Collectively, these results suggest a functional link between ROCO interactions and kinase activity of wild-type and mutant LRRK2. Importantly, our finding of ROCO(LRRK2) fragment-mediated LRRK2 kinase inhibition offers a novel lead for drug design and thus might have important implications for new therapeutic avenues in PD.

25331875|a|Most eukaryotic cells elaborate several proteoglycans critical for transmitting biochemical signals into and between cells. However, the regulation of proteoglycan biosynthesis is not completely understood. We show that the atypical secretory kinase family with sequence similarity 20, member B (Fam20B) phosphorylates the initiating xylose residue in the proteoglycan tetrasaccharide linkage region, and that this event functions as a molecular switch to regulate subsequent glycosaminoglycan assembly. Proteoglycans from FAM20B knockout cells contain a truncated tetrasaccharide linkage region consisting of a disaccharide capped with sialic acid (Siaα2-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1) that cannot be further elongated. We also show that the activity of galactosyl transferase II (GalT-II, B3GalT6), a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of the tetrasaccharide linkage region, is dramatically increased by Fam20B-dependent xylose phosphorylation. Inactivating mutations in the GALT-II gene (B3GALT6) associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome cause proteoglycan maturation defects similar to FAM20B deletion. Collectively, our findings suggest that GalT-II function is impaired by loss of Fam20B-dependent xylose phosphorylation and reveal a previously unappreciated mechanism for regulation of proteoglycan biosynthesis. 

25155755|a|Numerous oncogenic mutations occur within the BRAF kinase domain (BRAF(KD)). Here we show that stable BRAF-MEK1 complexes are enriched in BRAF(WT) and KRAS mutant (MT) cells but not in BRAF(MT) cells. The crystal structure of the BRAF(KD) in a complex with MEK1 reveals a face-to-face dimer sensitive to MEK1 phosphorylation but insensitive to BRAF dimerization. Structure-guided studies reveal that oncogenic BRAF mutations function by bypassing the requirement for BRAF dimerization for activity or weakening the interaction with MEK1. Finally, we show that conformation-specific BRAF inhibitors can sequester a dormant BRAF-MEK1 complex resulting in pathway inhibition. Taken together, these findings reveal a regulatory role for BRAF in the MAPK pathway independent of its kinase activity but dependent on interaction with MEK. 

25260751|a|Unlike the other MAP3Ks, MEKK1 (encoded by Map3k1) contains a PHD motif. To understand the role of this motif, we have created a knockin mutant of mouse Map3k1 (Map3k1(m) (PHD)) with an inactive PHD motif. Map3k1(m) (PHD) ES cells demonstrate that the MEKK1 PHD controls p38 and JNK activation during TGF-β, EGF and microtubule disruption signalling, but does not affect MAPK responses to hyperosmotic stress. Protein microarray profiling identified the adaptor TAB1 as a PHD substrate, and TGF-β- or EGF-stimulated Map3k1(m) (PHD) ES cells exhibit defective non-canonical ubiquitination of MEKK1 and TAB1. The MEKK1 PHD binds and mediates the transfer of Lys63-linked poly-Ub, using the conjugating enzyme UBE2N, onto TAB1 to regulate TAK1 and MAPK activation by TGF-β and EGF. Both the MEKK1 PHD and TAB1 are critical for ES-cell differentiation and tumourigenesis. Map3k1(m) (PHD) (/+) mice exhibit aberrant cardiac tissue, B-cell development, testis and T-cell signalling. 

7545675|a|Because the protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) Syp associates with the tyrosine-phosphorylated platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor (beta PDGFR), the beta PDGFR is a likely Syp substrate. We tested this hypothesis by determining whether recombinant Syp (rSyp) and a control PTP, recombinant PTP1B (rPTP1B), were able to dephosphorylate the beta PDGFR. The beta PDGFR was phosphorylated at multiple tyrosine residues in an in vitro kinase assay and then incubated with increasing concentrations of rSyp or rPTP1B. While the receptor was nearly completely dephosphorylated by high concentrations of rPTP1B, receptor dephosphorylation by rSyp plateaued at approximately 50%. Two-dimensional phosphopeptide maps of the beta PDGFR demonstrated that rSyp displayed a clear preference for certain receptor phosphorylation sites; the most efficiently dephosphorylated sites were phosphotyrosines (Tyr(P)-771 and -751, followed by Tyr(P)740, while Tyr(P)-1021 and Tyr(P)-1009 were very poor substrates. In contrast, rPTP1B displayed no selectivity for the various rPTP1B displayed no selectivity for the various beta PDGFR tyrosine phosphorylation sites and dephosphorylated all of them with comparable efficiency. A Syp construct that lacked the SH2 domains was still able to discriminate between the various receptor phosphorylation sites, although less effectively than full-length Syp. These in vitro studies predicted that Syp can dephosphorylate the receptor in vivo. Indeed, we found that a beta PDGFR mutant (F1009) that associates poorly with Syp, had a much slower in vivo rate of receptor dephosphorylation than the wild type receptor. In addition, the GTPase-activating protein of Ras (GAP) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase were less stably associated with the wild type beta PDGFR than with the F1009 receptor. These findings are consistent with the in vitro experiments showign that Syp prefers to dephosphorylate sites on the beta PDGFR, that are important for binding phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (Tyr(P)-740 and Tyr(P)-751) and GAP (Tyr(P)-771). These studies reveal that Syp is a substrate-selective PTP and that both the catalytic domain and the SH2 domains contribute to Syp's ability to choose substrates. Furthermore, it appears that Syp plays a role in PDGF-dependent intracellular signal relay by selectively dephosphorylating the beta PDGFR and thereby regulating the binding of a distinct group of receptor-associated signal relay enzymes.

7539106|a|Its reactivity to the antiphosphotyrosine 4G10 monoclonal antibody by Western blot analysis demonstrated that the human estrogen receptor (hER) from human MCF-7 cells and the recombinant hER expressed in Sf9 insect cells were phosphorylated on tyrosine(s). Reverse phase-HPLC separation of a tryptic digest of the 32P-labeled purified hER from Sf9 and MCF-7 cells followed by amino acid and radiolabel sequencing revealed that tyrosine-537 was phosphorylated. The phosphorylation on tyrosine-537 was independent of estradiol treatment of MCF-7 cells, indicating that tyrosine-537 is a basal phosphorylation site. Two src family tyrosine kinases, p60c-src and p56lck, phosphorylated the purified recombinant hER on tyrosine-537 in vitro. In addition, two tyrosine phosphatases, protein tyrosine phosphatase-1B and src homology-2 protein tyrosine phosphatase-1, dephosphorylated phosphotyrosine-537 of the hER in vitro. These data suggest that tyrosine phosphorylation of the hER is regulated by potentially oncogenic tyrosine kinases and phosphatases that may modulate the function of ER in normal and/or abnormal cell growth.

7514173|a|The enzyme glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) has been implicated in the control of several metabolic enzymes and transcription factors in response to extracellular signals. In the past, the enzyme has been considered to be a protein Ser/Thr kinase although it was recently reported to contain Tyr(P) (Hughes, K., Nikolakaki, E., Plyte, S. E., Totty, N. F., and Woodgett, J. R. (1993) EMBO J. 12, 803-808). A cDNA encoding rabbit skeletal muscle GSK-3 beta was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli as an active protein kinase, with apparent M(r) 46,000, capable of phosphorylating several known GSK-3 substrates. Recombinant GSK-3 beta autophosphorylated on Ser, Thr, and Tyr residues although the enzyme already contained Tyr(P) as judged by its recognition by anti-Tyr(P) antibodies. The net result of the autophosphorylation was a 3-5-fold reduction in enzyme activity. GSK-3 alpha, purified from rabbit muscle, also underwent autophosphorylation but only on Ser and Thr residues. In this case, the autophosphorylation stabilized the enzyme activity compared with the control lacking ATP/Mg2+. Of several phosphatases tested, the lambda-phage phosphatase was the most effective in dephosphorylating at Ser and Thr residues but did not dephosphorylate at Tyr residues. The action of the lambda-phosphatase caused a reactivation of GSK-3 beta to approximately 80% of the starting activity. The protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B was able to dephosphorylate at Tyr residues leading to a reduction in enzyme activity. A truncated form of GSK-3 beta, apparent M(r) 40,000, had a significantly higher specific activity, was defective in autophosphorylation, and was not inactivated in the autophosphorylation reaction. We conclude that GSK-3 beta is a dual specificity protein kinase in the same sense as the mitogen-activated protein kinase/ERK family of enzymes. Phosphorylation at different residues differentially controls enzyme activity, Ser/Thr phosphorylation causing inactivation and Tyr phosphorylation resulting in increased activity.

7507203|a|Src family protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) play an essential role in antigen receptor-initiated lymphocyte activation. Their activity is largely regulated by a negative regulatory tyrosine which is a substrate for the activating action of the CD45 phosphotyrosine phosphatase (PTPase) or, conversely, the suppressing action of the cytosolic p50csk PTK. Here we report that CD45 was phosphorylated by p50csk on two tyrosine residues, one of them identified as Tyr-1193. This residue was not phosphorylated by T-cell PTKs p56lck and p59fyn. Tyr-1193 was phosphorylated in intact T cells, and phosphorylation increased upon treatment with PTPase inhibitors, indicating that this tyrosine is a target for a constitutively active PTK. Cotransfection of CD45 and csk into COS-1 cells caused tyrosine phosphorylation of CD45 in the intact cells. Tyrosine-phosphorylated CD45 bound p56lck through the SH2 domain of the kinase. Finally, p50csk-mediated phosphorylation of CD45 caused a severalfold increase in its PTPase activity. Our results show that direct tyrosine phosphorylation of CD45 can affect its activity and association with Src family PTKs and that this phosphorylation could be mediated by p50csk. If this is also true in the intact cells, it adds a new dimension to the physiological function of p50csk in T lymphocytes.

7685104|a|The substrate specificity of a recombinant protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase) was probed using synthetic phosphotyrosine-containing peptides corresponding to several of the autophosphorylation sites in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). The peptide corresponding to the autophosphorylation site, EGFR988-998, was chosen for further study due to its favorable kinetic constants. The contribution of individual amino acid side chains to the binding and catalysis was ascertained utilizing a strategy in which each amino acid within the undecapeptide EGFR988-998 (DADEpYLIPQQG) was sequentially substituted by an Ala residue (Ala-scan). The resulting effects due to singular Ala substitution were assessed by kinetic analysis with two widely divergent homogeneous PTPases. A "consensus sequence" for PTPase recognition may be suggested from the Ala-scan data as DADEpYAAPA, and the presence of acidic residues proximate to the NH2-terminal side of phosphorylation is critical for high-affinity binding and catalysis. The Km value for EGFR988-998 decreased as the pH increased, suggesting that phosphate dianion is favored for substrate binding. The results demonstrate that chemical features in the primary structure surrounding the dephosphorylation site contribute to PTPase substrate specificity.

25175806|a|MYC proteins are major drivers of cancer yet are considered undruggable because their DNA binding domains are composed of two extended alpha helices with no apparent surfaces for small-molecule binding. Proteolytic degradation of MYCN protein is regulated in part by a kinase-independent function of Aurora A. We describe a class of inhibitors that disrupts the native conformation of Aurora A and drives the degradation of MYCN protein across MYCN-driven cancers. Comparison of cocrystal structures with structure-activity relationships across multiple inhibitors and chemotypes, coupled with mechanistic studies and biochemical assays, delineates an Aurora A conformation-specific effect on proteolytic degradation of MYCN, rather than simple nanomolar-level inhibition of Aurora A kinase activity. 

25249323|a|ATM- and RAD3-related (ATR)/Chk1 and ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM)/Chk2 signalling pathways play critical roles in the DNA damage response. Here we report that the E3 ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 determines cell apoptosis rates downstream of DNA damage-induced ATR/Chk1 signalling by promoting degradation of RhoB, a small GTPase recognized as tumour suppressor by promoting death of transformed cells. We show that Smurf1 targets RhoB for degradation to control its abundance in the basal state. DNA damage caused by ultraviolet light or the alkylating agent methyl methanesulphonate strongly activates Chk1, leading to phosphorylation of Smurf1 that enhances its self-degradation, hence resulting in a RhoB accumulation to promote apoptosis. Suppressing RhoB levels by overexpressing Smurf1 or blocking Chk1-dependent Smurf1 self-degradation significantly inhibits apoptosis. Hence, our study unravels a novel ATR/Chk1/Smurf1/RhoB pathway that determines cell fate after DNA damage, and raises the possibility that aberrant upregulation of Smurf1 promotes tumorigenesis by excessively targeting RhoB for degradation. 

25314079|a|Snail is primarily known as a transcriptional repressor that induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition by suppressing adherent proteins. Emerging evidence suggests that Snail can act as an activator; however, the mechanism and biological significance are unclear. Here, we found that CREB-binding protein (CBP) is the critical factor in Snail-mediated target gene transactivation. CBP interacts with Snail and acetylates Snail at lysine 146 and lysine 187, which prevents the repressor complex formation. We further identified several Snail-activated targets, including TNF-α, which is also the upstream signal for Snail acetylation, and CCL2 and CCL5, which promote the recruitment of tumor-associated macrophages. Here, we present our results on the mechanism by which Snail induces target gene transactivation to remodel the tumor microenvironment. 

25158884|a|The human protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 4 (PTPN4) prevents cells death. Targeting its PDZ domain abrogates this protection and triggers apoptosis. We demonstrate here that the PDZ domain inhibits the phosphatase activity of PTPN4. The mere binding of a PDZ ligand is sufficient to release the catalytic inhibition. We combined analytical ultracentrifugation, small angle X-ray scattering and NMR to understand how the PDZ domain controls PTPN4 activity. We show that the physiologically active PTPN4 two-domain, encompassing the PDZ and the phosphatase domains, adopts a predominant compact conformation in solution. The PDZ ligand binding restores the catalytic competence of PTPN4 disrupting the transient interdomain communication. This study strengthens the emerging notion that PDZ domains can act as regulators of enzyme activity and therefore are active players in the dynamic regulation of signaling pathways.

22345554|a|The farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is a ligand (bile acid)-dependent nuclear receptor that regulates target genes involved in every aspect of bile acid homeostasis. Upon binding of ligand, FXR recruits an array of coactivators and associated proteins, some of which have intrinsic enzymatic activity that modify histones or even components of the transcriptional complex. In this study, we show chromatin occupancy by the Set7/9 methyltransferase at the FXR response element (FXRE) and direct methylation of FXR in vivo and in vitro at lysine 206. siRNA depletion of Set7/9 in the Huh-7 liver cell line decreased endogenous mRNAs of the FXR target genes, the short heterodimer partner (SHP) and bile salt export pump (BSEP). Mutation of the methylation site at K206 of FXR to an arginine prevented methylation by Set7/9. A pan-methyllysine antibody recognized the wild-type FXR but not the K206R mutant form. An electromobility shift assay showed that methylation by Set7/9 enhanced binding of FXR/retinoic X receptor-α to the FXRE. Interaction between hinge domain of FXR (containing K206) and Set7/9 was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation, GST pull down, and mammalian two-hybrid experiments. Set7/9 overexpression in Huh-7 cells significantly enhanced transactivation of the SHP and BSEP promoters in a ligand-dependent fashion by wild-type FXR but not the K206R mutant FXR. A Set7/9 mutant deficient in methyltransferase activity was also not effective in increasing transactivation of the BSEP promoter. These studies demonstrate that posttranslational methylation of FXR by Set7/9 contributes to the transcriptional activation of FXR-target genes.

22193721|a|Cell motility and adhesion involves dynamic microtubule (MT) acetylation/deacetylation, a process regulated by enzymes as HDAC6, a major cytoplasmic α-tubulin deacetylase. We identify G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) as a key novel stimulator of HDAC6. GRK2, which levels inversely correlate with the extent of α-tubulin acetylation in epithelial cells and fibroblasts, directly associates with and phosphorylates HDAC6 to stimulate α-tubulin deacetylase activity. Remarkably, phosphorylation of GRK2 itself at S670 specifically potentiates its ability to regulate HDAC6. GRK2 and HDAC6 colocalize in the lamellipodia of migrating cells, leading to local tubulin deacetylation and enhanced motility. Consistently, cells expressing GRK2-K220R or GRK2-S670A mutants, unable to phosphorylate HDAC6, exhibit highly acetylated cortical MTs and display impaired migration and protrusive activity. Finally, we find that a balanced, GRK2/HDAC6-mediated regulation of tubulin acetylation differentially modulates the early and late stages of cellular spreading. This novel GRK2/HDAC6 functional interaction may have important implications in pathological contexts.

22402663|a|FOXO transcription factors have a critical role in oxidative stress-induced neuronal cell death. A variety of post-translational modifications of FOXO family proteins have been reported, including phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiqutination and recently arginine methylation. Here, we demonstrate that the methyltransferase Set9 methylates FOXO3 at lysine 270. Methylation of FOXO3 leads to the inhibition of its DNA-binding activity and transactivation. Accordingly, lysine methylation reduces oxidative stress-induced and FOXO3-mediated Bim expression and neuronal apoptosis in neurons. Collectively, these findings define a novel modification of FOXO3 and show that lysine methylation negatively regulates FOXO3-mediated transcription and neuronal apoptosis.

22308441|a|The enzyme inositol 1,3,4-trisphosphate 5/6-kinase (ITPK1) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the formation of higher phosphorylated forms of inositol in mammalian cells. Because it sits at a key regulatory point in the inositol metabolic pathway, its activity is likely to be regulated. We have previously shown that ITPK1 is phosphorylated, a posttranslational modification used by cells to regulate enzyme activity. We show here that ITPK1 is modified by acetylation of internal lysine residues. The acetylation sites, as determined by mass spectrometry, were found to be lysines 340, 383, and 410, which are all located on the surface of this protein. Overexpression of the acetyltransferases CREB-binding protein or p300 resulted in the acetylation of ITPK1, whereas overexpression of mammalian silent information regulator 2 resulted in the deacetylation of ITPK1. Functionally, ITPK1 acetylation regulates its stability. CREB-binding protein dramatically decreased the half-life of ITPK1. We further found that ITPK1 acetylation down-regulated its enzyme activity. HEK293 cells stably expressing acetylated ITPK1 had reduced levels of the higher phosphorylated forms of inositol, compared with the levels seen in cells expressing unacetylated ITPK1. These results demonstrate that lysine acetylation alters both the stability as well as the activity of ITPK1 in cells.

22343720|a|Methylation of histones is central to chromatin regulation, and thus previously unknown mechanisms regulating genome function can be revealed through the discovery of new histone methyl marks. Here we identify Set5 as the first histone H4 methyltransferase, which monomethylates the critical H4 lysine residues 5, 8 and 12 in budding yeast. Set5's enzymatic activity functions together with the global chromatin-modifying complexes COMPASS and NuA4 to regulate cell growth and stress responses.

22307056|a|Understanding and controlling the mechanism by which stem cells balance self-renewal versus differentiation is of great importance for stem cell therapeutics. Klf4 promotes the self-renewal of embryonic stem cells, but the precise mechanism regulating this role of Klf4 is unclear. We found that ERK1 or ERK2 binds the activation domain of Klf4 and directly phosphorylates Klf4 at Ser123. This phosphorylation suppresses Klf4 activity, inducing embryonic stem cell differentiation. Conversely, inhibition of Klf4 phosphorylation enhances Klf4 activity and suppresses embryonic stem cell differentiation. Notably, phosphorylation of Klf4 by ERKs causes recruitment and binding of the F-box proteins βTrCP1 or βTrCP2 (components of an ubiquitin E3 ligase) to the Klf4 N-terminal domain, which results in Klf4 ubiquitination and degradation. Overall, our data provide a molecular basis for the role of ERK1 and ERK2 in regulating Klf4-mediated mouse embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

29340707|a|Regulation of cell division requires the integration of signals implicated in chromatin reorganization and coordination of its sequential changes in mitosis. Vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) and Aurora B (AURKB) are two nuclear kinases involved in different steps of cell division. We have studied whether there is any functional connection between these two nuclear kinases, which phosphorylate histone H3 in Thr3 and Ser10, respectively. VRK1 and AURKB are able to form a stable protein complex, which represents only a minor subpopulation of each kinase within the cell and is detected following nocodazole release. Each kinase is able to inhibit the kinase activity of the other kinase, as well as inhibit their specific phosphorylation of histone H3. In locations where the two kinases interact, there is a different pattern of histone modifications, indicating that there is a local difference in chromatin during mitosis because of the local complexes formed by these kinases and their asymmetric intracellular distribution. Depletion of VRK1 downregulates the gene expression of BIRC5 (survivin) that recognizes H3-T3ph, both are dependent on the activity of VRK1, and is recovered with kinase active murine VRK1, but not with a kinase-dead protein. The H3-Thr3ph-survivin complex is required for AURB recruitment, and their loss prevents the localization of ACA and AURKB in centromeres. The cross inhibition of the kinases at the end of mitosis might facilitate the formation of daughter cells. A sequential role for VRK1, AURKB, and haspin in the progression of mitosis is proposed.

22327296|a|Menin is a tumour suppressor protein whose loss or inactivation causes multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 (MEN1), a hereditary autosomal dominant tumour syndrome that is characterized by tumorigenesis in multiple endocrine organs. Menin interacts with many proteins and is involved in a variety of cellular processes. Menin binds the JUN family transcription factor JUND and inhibits its transcriptional activity. Several MEN1 missense mutations disrupt the menin-JUND interaction, suggesting a correlation between the tumour-suppressor function of menin and its suppression of JUND-activated transcription. Menin also interacts with mixed lineage leukaemia protein 1 (MLL1), a histone H3 lysine 4 methyltransferase, and functions as an oncogenic cofactor to upregulate gene transcription and promote MLL1-fusion-protein-induced leukaemogenesis. A recent report on the tethering of MLL1 to chromatin binding factor lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF) by menin indicates that menin is a molecular adaptor coordinating the functions of multiple proteins. Despite its importance, how menin interacts with many distinct partners and regulates their functions remains poorly understood. Here we present the crystal structures of human menin in its free form and in complexes with MLL1 or with JUND, or with an MLL1-LEDGF heterodimer. These structures show that menin contains a deep pocket that binds short peptides of MLL1 or JUND in the same manner, but that it can have opposite effects on transcription. The menin-JUND interaction blocks JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK)-mediated JUND phosphorylation and suppresses JUND-induced transcription. In contrast, menin promotes gene transcription by binding the transcription activator MLL1 through the peptide pocket while still interacting with the chromatin-anchoring protein LEDGF at a distinct surface formed by both menin and MLL1.

22245969|a|Addition and removal of ubiquitin or ubiquitin chains to and from proteins is a tightly regulated process that contributes to cellular signaling and protein stability. Here we show that phosphorylation of the human deubiquitinase DUBA (OTUD5) at a single residue, Ser177, is both necessary and sufficient to activate the enzyme. The crystal structure of the ubiquitin aldehyde adduct of active DUBA reveals a marked cooperation between phosphorylation and substrate binding. An intricate web of interactions involving the phosphate and the C-terminal tail of ubiquitin cause DUBA to fold around its substrate, revealing why phosphorylation is essential for deubiquitinase activity. Phosphoactivation of DUBA represents an unprecedented mode of protease regulation and a clear link between two major cellular signal transduction systems: phosphorylation and ubiquitin modification.

22286129|a|Constitutive activation of STAT5 is critical for the maintenance of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) characterized by the BCR-ABL oncoprotein. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for the STAT5-activating kinase JAK2 have been discussed as a treatment option for CML patients. Using murine leukemia models combined with inducible ablation of JAK2, we show JAK2 dependence for initial lymphoid transformation, which is lost once leukemia is established. In contrast, initial myeloid transformation and leukemia maintenance were independent of JAK2. Nevertheless, several JAK2 TKIs induced apoptosis in BCR-ABL(+) cells irrespective of the presence of JAK2. This is caused by the previously unknown direct 'off-target' inhibition of BCR-ABL. Cellular and enzymatic analyses suggest that BCR-ABL phosphorylates STAT5 directly. Our findings suggest uncoupling of the canonical JAK2-STAT5 module upon BCR-ABL expression, thereby making JAK2 targeting dispensable. Thus, attempts to pharmacologically target STAT5 in BCR-ABL(+) diseases need to focus on STAT5 itself.

22363216|a|Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common cause of autosomal dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and also contribute to idiopathic PD. LRRK2 encodes a large multi-domain protein with GTPase and kinase activity. Initial data indicates that an intact functional GTPase domain is critically required for LRRK2 kinase activity. PD-associated mutations in LRRK2, including the most common G2019S variant, have variable effects on enzymatic activity but commonly alter neuronal process morphology. The mechanisms underlying the intrinsic and extrinsic regulation of LRRK2 GTPase and kinase activity, and the pathogenic effects of familial mutations, are incompletely understood. Here, we identify a novel functional interaction between LRRK2 and ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase-activating protein 1 (ArfGAP1). LRRK2 and ArfGAP1 interact in vitro in mammalian cells and in vivo in brain, and co-localize in the cytoplasm and at Golgi membranes. PD-associated and functional mutations that alter the GTPase activity of LRRK2 modulate the interaction with ArfGAP1. The GTP hydrolysis activity of LRRK2 is markedly enhanced by ArfGAP1 supporting a role for ArfGAP1 as a GTPase-activating protein for LRRK2. Unexpectedly, ArfGAP1 promotes the kinase activity of LRRK2 suggesting a potential role for GTP hydrolysis in kinase activation. Furthermore, LRRK2 robustly and directly phosphorylates ArfGAP1 in vitro. Silencing of ArfGAP1 expression in primary cortical neurons rescues the neurite shortening phenotype induced by G2019S LRRK2 overexpression, whereas the co-expression of ArfGAP1 and LRRK2 synergistically promotes neurite shortening in a manner dependent upon LRRK2 GTPase activity. Neurite shortening induced by ArfGAP1 overexpression is also attenuated by silencing of LRRK2. Our data reveal a novel role for ArfGAP1 in regulating the GTPase activity and neuronal toxicity of LRRK2; reciprocally, LRRK2 phosphorylates ArfGAP1 and is required for ArfGAP1 neuronal toxicity. ArfGAP1 may represent a promising target for interfering with LRRK2-dependent neurodegeneration in familial and sporadic PD.

22340593|a|Elevated Aurora kinase-A expression is correlated with abrogation of DNA damage-induced apoptotic response and mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) override in human tumor cells. We report that Aurora-A phosphorylation of p73 at serine235 abrogates its transactivation function and causes cytoplasmic sequestration in a complex with the chaperon protein mortalin. Aurora-A phosphorylated p73 also facilitates inactivation of SAC through dissociation of the MAD2-CDC20 complex in cells undergoing mitosis. Cells expressing phosphor-mimetic mutant (S235D) of p73 manifest altered growth properties, resistance to cisplatin- induced apoptosis, as well as premature dissociation of the MAD2-CDC20 complex, and accelerated mitotic exit with SAC override in the presence of spindle damage. Elevated cytoplasmic p73 in Aurora-A overexpressing primary human tumors corroborates the experimental findings.

22304920|a|The transcription factor ATF2 elicits oncogenic activities in melanoma and tumor suppressor activities in nonmalignant skin cancer. Here, we identify that ATF2 tumor suppressor function is determined by its ability to localize at the mitochondria, where it alters membrane permeability following genotoxic stress. The ability of ATF2 to reach the mitochondria is determined by PKCε, which directs ATF2 nuclear localization. Genotoxic stress attenuates PKCε effect on ATF2; enables ATF2 nuclear export and localization at the mitochondria, where it perturbs the HK1-VDAC1 complex; increases mitochondrial permeability; and promotes apoptosis. Significantly, high levels of PKCε, as seen in melanoma cells, block ATF2 nuclear export and function at the mitochondria, thereby attenuating apoptosis following exposure to genotoxic stress. In melanoma tumor samples, high PKCε levels associate with poor prognosis. Overall, our findings provide the framework for understanding how subcellular localization enables ATF2 oncogenic or tumor suppressor functions.

22184064|a|Cyclin-dependent kinase 16 (CDK16, PCTK1) is a poorly characterized protein kinase, highly expressed in the testis and the brain. Here, we report that CDK16 is activated by membrane-associated cyclin Y (CCNY). Treatment of transfected human cells with the protein kinase A (PKA) activator forskolin blocked, while kinase inhibition promoted, CCNY-dependent targeting of CDK16-green fluorescent protein (GFP) to the cell membrane. CCNY binding to CDK16 required a region upstream of the kinase domain and was found to be inhibited by phosphorylation of serine 153, a potential PKA phosphorylation site. Thus, in contrast to other CDKs, CDK16 is regulated by phosphorylation-controlled cyclin binding. CDK16 isolated from murine testis was unphosphorylated, interacted with CCNY, and exhibited kinase activity. To investigate the function of CDK16 in vivo, we established a conditional knockout allele. Mice lacking CDK16 developed normally, but male mice were infertile. Spermatozoa isolated from their epididymis displayed thinning and elongation of the annulus region, adopted a bent shape, and showed impaired motility. Moreover, CDK16-deficient spermatozoa had malformed heads and excess residual cytoplasm, suggesting a role of CDK16 in spermiation. Thus, CDK16 is a membrane-targeted CDK essential for spermatogenesis.

22303461|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a large protein kinase containing multi-functional domains, has been identified as the causal molecule for autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). In the present study, we demonstrated for the first time that (i) LRRK2 interacts with tau in a tubulin-dependent manner; (ii) LRRK2 directly phosphorylates tubulin-associated tau, but not free tau; (iii) LRRK2 phosphorylates tau at Thr181 as one of the target sites; and (iv) The PD-associated LRRK2 mutations, G2019S and I2020T, elevated the degree of tau-phosphorylation. These results provide direct proof that tau is a physiological substrate for LRRK2. Furthermore, we revealed that LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of tau reduces its tubulin-binding ability. Our results suggest that LRRK2 plays an important role as a physiological regulator for phosphorylation-mediated dissociation of tau from microtubules, which is an integral aspect of microtubule dynamics essential for neurite outgrowth and axonal transport.

25026213|a|In selective autophagy, receptors are central for cargo selection and delivery. However, it remains yet unclear whether and how multiple autophagy receptors might form complex and function concertedly to control autophagy. Optineurin (OPTN), implicated genetically in glaucoma and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, was a recently identified autophagy receptor. Here we report that tumor-suppressor HACE1, a ubiquitin ligase, ubiquitylates OPTN and promotes its interaction with p62/SQSTM1 to form the autophagy receptor complex, thus accelerating autophagic flux. Interestingly, the Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chains that HACE1 conjugates onto OPTN might predominantly target OPTN for autophagic degradation. By demonstrating that the HACE1-OPTN axis synergistically suppresses growth and tumorigenicity of lung cancer cells, our findings may open an avenue for developing autophagy-targeted therapeutic intervention into cancer. 

24904275|a|Mutations in Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) are associated with familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 is a complex protein that consists of multiple domains executing several functions, including GTP hydrolysis, kinase activity, and protein binding. Robust evidence suggests that LRRK2 acts at the synaptic site as a molecular hub connecting synaptic vesicles to cytoskeletal elements via a complex panel of protein-protein interactions. Here we investigated the impact of pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity on synaptic function. Acute treatment with LRRK2 inhibitors reduced the frequency of spontaneous currents, the rate of synaptic vesicle trafficking and the release of neurotransmitter from isolated synaptosomes. The investigation of complementary models lacking LRRK2 expression allowed us to exclude potential off-side effects of kinase inhibitors on synaptic functions. Next we studied whether kinase inhibition affects LRRK2 heterologous interactions. We found that the binding among LRRK2, presynaptic proteins and synaptic vesicles is affected by kinase inhibition. Our results suggest that LRRK2 kinase activity influences synaptic vesicle release via modulation of LRRK2 macro-molecular complex. 

24949976|a|Most E3 ligases use a RING domain to activate a thioester-linked E2∼ubiquitin-like protein (UBL) intermediate and promote UBL transfer to a remotely bound target protein. Nonetheless, RING E3 mechanisms matching a specific UBL and acceptor lysine remain elusive, including for RBX1, which mediates NEDD8 ligation to cullins and >10% of all ubiquitination. We report the structure of a trapped RING E3-E2∼UBL-target intermediate representing RBX1-UBC12∼NEDD8-CUL1-DCN1, which reveals the mechanism of NEDD8 ligation and how a particular UBL and acceptor lysine are matched by a multifunctional RING E3. Numerous mechanisms specify cullin neddylation while preventing noncognate ubiquitin ligation. Notably, E2-E3-target and RING-E2∼UBL modules are not optimized to function independently, but instead require integration by the UBL and target for maximal reactivity. The UBL and target regulate the catalytic machinery by positioning the RING-E2∼UBL catalytic center, licensing the acceptor lysine, and influencing E2 reactivity, thereby driving their specific coupling by a multifunctional RING E3. 

25026211|a|It is currently unclear whether Merlin/NF2 suppresses tumorigenesis by activating upstream components of the Hippo pathway at the plasma membrane or by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4(DCAF1) in the nucleus. We found that derepressed CRL4(DCAF1) promotes YAP- and TEAD-dependent transcription by ubiquitylating and, thereby, inhibiting Lats1 and 2 in the nucleus. Genetic epistasis experiments and analysis of tumor-derived missense mutations indicate that this signaling connection sustains the oncogenicity of Merlin-deficient tumor cells. Analysis of clinical samples confirms that this pathway operates in NF2-mutant tumors. We conclude that derepressed CRL4(DCAF1) promotes activation of YAP by inhibiting Lats1 and 2 in the nucleus. 

25009464|a|Missense mutations in the Leucine-Rich Repeat protein Kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common genetic predisposition to develop Parkinson's disease (PD) (Farrer et al., 2005; Skipper et al., 2005; Di Fonzo et al., 2006; Healy et al., 2008; Paisan-Ruiz et al., 2008; Lesage et al., 2010). LRRK2 is a large multi-domain phosphoprotein with a GTPase domain and a serine/threonine protein kinase domain whose activity is implicated in neuronal toxicity; however the precise mechanism is unknown. LRRK2 autophosphorylates on several serine/threonine residues across the enzyme and is found constitutively phosphorylated on Ser910, Ser935, Ser955, and Ser973, which are proposed to be regulated by upstream kinases. Here we investigate the phosphoregulation at these sites by analyzing the effects of disease-associated mutations Arg1441Cys, Arg1441Gly, Ala1442Pro, Tyr1699Cys, Ile2012Thr, Gly2019Ser, and Ile2020Thr. We also studied alanine substitutions of phosphosite serines 910, 935, 955, and 973 and specific LRRK2 inhibition on autophosphorylation of LRRK2 Ser1292, Thr1491, Thr2483 and phosphorylation at the cellular sites. We found that mutants in the Roc-COR domains, including Arg1441Cys, Arg1441His, Ala1442Pro, and Tyr1699Cys, can positively enhance LRRK2 kinase activity, while concomitantly inducing the dephosphorylation of the cellular sites. Mutation of the cellular sites individually did not affect LRRK2 intrinsic kinase activity; however, Ser910/935/955/973Ala mutations trended toward increased kinase activity of LRRK2. Increased cAMP levels did not lead to increased LRRK2 cellular site phosphorylation, 14-3-3 binding or kinase activity. In cells, inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity leads to dephosphorylation of Ser1292 by Calyculin A and Okadaic acid sensitive phosphatases, while the cellular sites are dephosphorylated by Calyculin A sensitive phosphatases. These findings indicate that comparative analysis of both Ser1292 and Ser910/935/955/973 phosphorylation sites will provide important and distinct measures of LRRK2 kinase and biological activity in vitro and in vivo. 

24860872|a|The enzyme 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) catalyzes the first reactions in the biosynthesis of leukotrienes, powerful lipid mediators that are involved in several physiological and pathological processes. 5-LO activity is tightly regulated by several factors, including post translational modifications (PTMs). Phosphorylations of 5-LO by the kinases extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (Erk2), mitogen-activated protein kinase activated protein kinase 2 (MK2) and protein kinase A (PKA) have been described to regulate 5-LO activity. Furthermore, 5-LO phosphorylation is considered a determinant of drug candidate potency. However, no evidence on a molecular level, as can be provided by MS, has as yet been presented for these PTMs. Here, we employ a workflow including different proteolytic cleavages and phosphopeptide enrichment for detection of 5-LO phosphorylation by MALDI-MS. Proof for the known phosphorylation sites of MK2 (Ser271) and PKA (Ser523) was provided by MS after in vitro phosphorylation, but not for the postulated Erk2 site (Ser663). Detection limits have been determined for all three sites. Moreover, we identified novel tyrosine kinase target sites within 5-LO using in silico and in vitro methods. Tyr42, Tyr53 and either Tyr94 or Tyr445 were phosphorylated by the Src kinases Fgr, hematopoietic cell kinase (HCK) and Yes. To analyze the phosphorylation state in the cellular context, we created stably 5-LO-transduced Mono Mac 6 cells. Here, we only detected phospho-Ser271 by MS, whereas immunoblot analysis indicated tyrosine phosphorylation, phospho-Ser271 and phospho-Ser663. Unexpectedly, phospho-Ser271 occurred independent of cell stimulation. Taken together, we describe a method for the molecular analysis of 5-LO phosphorylation, provide insights regarding the occurrence of known phosphorylation sites partly in contrast to earlier studies and present first evidence on novel phosphosites.

24857377|a|The functional association of NPM1 with Aurora kinases is well documented. Surprisingly, although NPM1 is a well characterized phosphoprotein, it is unknown whether it is a substrate of Aurora kinases. We have found that Aurora kinases A and B can phosphorylate NPM1 at a single serine residue, Ser125, in vitro and in vivo. Phosphorylated-S125-NPM1 (pS125-NPM1) localizes to the midbody region during late cytokinesis where it colocalizes with Aurora B. The overexpression of mutant (S125A) NPM1 resulted in the deregulation of centrosome duplication and mitotic defects possibly due to cytokinesis failure. These data suggest that Aurora kinase B-mediated phosphorylation of NPM1 plays a critical role during mitosis, which could have wider implications in oncogenesis. 

25446991|a|The G2019S leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation is the most common cause of genetic Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the molecular mechanism underlying LRRK2 G2019S-induced cellular pathology is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that LRRK2 G2019S bound to and phosphorylated Bcl-2, a mitochondrial anti-apoptotic protein, at Threonine 56. Either stable expression of Bcl-2 or transient expression of a Bcl-2 phosphor mutant (Bcl-2(T56A)) abolished LRRK2 G2019S-induced mitochondrial depolarization and autophagy. Together, our findings reveal a previously unidentified target of LRRK2 G2019S, showing that Bcl-2 serves as a point of crosstalk between LRRK2 G2019S-mediated mitochondrial disorder and dysregulation of autophagy. 

22660580|a|The ST2L receptor for interleukin 33 (IL-33) mediates pulmonary inflammation and immune system-related disorders, such as asthma and rheumatoid arthritis. At present, very little is known about the molecular regulation of ST2L expression. Here we found that FBXL19, an 'orphan' member of the Skp1-Cullin-F-box family of E3 ubiquitin ligases, selectively bound to ST2L to mediate its polyubiquitination and elimination in the proteasome. Degradation of ST2L involved phosphorylation of ST2L at Ser442 catalyzed by the kinase GSK3β. Overexpression of FBXL19 abrogated the proapoptotic and inflammatory effects of IL-33 and lessened the severity of lung injury in mouse models of pneumonia. Our results suggest that modulation of the IL-33-ST2L axis by ubiquitin ligases might serve as a unique strategy for lessening pulmonary inflammation.

22770216|a|Mitosis in metazoa requires nuclear envelope (NE) disassembly and reassembly. NE disassembly is driven by multiple phosphorylation events. Mitotic phosphorylation of the protein BAF reduces its affinity for chromatin and the LEM family of inner nuclear membrane proteins; loss of this BAF-mediated chromatin-NE link contributes to NE disassembly. BAF must reassociate with chromatin and LEM proteins at mitotic exit to reform the NE; however, how its dephosphorylation is regulated is unknown. Here, we show that the C. elegans protein LEM-4L and its human ortholog Lem4 (also called ANKLE2) are both required for BAF dephosphorylation. They act in part by inhibiting BAF's mitotic kinase, VRK-1, in vivo and in vitro. In addition, Lem4/LEM-4L interacts with PP2A and is required for it to dephosphorylate BAF during mitotic exit. By coordinating VRK-1- and PP2A-mediated signaling on BAF, Lem4/LEM-4L controls postmitotic NE formation in a function conserved from worms to humans.

22665060|a|LASP-1 is a multidomain protein predominantly localized at focal contacts, where it regulates cytoskeleton dynamics and cell migration. However, in different tumor entities, a nuclear LASP-1 accumulation is observed, thought to have an important role in cancer progression. Until now, the molecular mechanisms that control LASP-1 nuclear import were not elucidated. Here, we identified a novel LASP-1-binding partner, zona occludens protein 2 (ZO-2), and established its role in the signal transduction pathway of LASP-1 nucleo-cytoplasmatic shuttling. Phosphorylation of LASP-1 by PKA at serine 146 induces translocation of the LASP-1/ZO-2 complex from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Interaction occurs within the carboxyterminal proline-rich motif of ZO-2 and the SH3 domain in LASP-1. In situ proximity ligation assay confirmed the direct binding between LASP-1 and ZO-2 and visualized the shuttling. Nuclear export is mediated by Crm-1 and a newly identified nuclear export signal in LASP-1. Finally, dephosphorylation of LASP-1 by phosphatase PP2B is suggested to relocalize the protein back to focal contacts. In summary, we define a new pathway for LASP-1 in tumor progression.

22726438|a|Receptor tyrosine kinase activity is known to occur in the absence of extracellular stimuli. Importantly, this "background" level of receptor phosphorylation is insufficient to effect a downstream response, suggesting that strict controls are present and prohibit full activation. Here a mechanism is described in which control of FGFR2 activation is provided by the adaptor protein Grb2. Dimeric Grb2 binds to the C termini of two FGFR2 molecules. This heterotetramer is capable of a low-level receptor transphosphorylation, but C-terminal phosphorylation and recruitment of signaling proteins are sterically hindered. Upon stimulation, FGFR2 phosphorylates tyrosine residues on Grb2, promoting dissociation from the receptor and allowing full activation of downstream signaling. These observations establish a role for Grb2 as an active regulator of RTK signaling.

22771473|a|Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A) is a protein subject to hypusination, which is essential for its function. eIF5A is also acetylated, but the role of that modification is unknown. Here, we report that acetylation regulates the subcellular localization of eIF5A. We identified PCAF as the major cellular acetyltransferase of eIF5A, and HDAC6 and SIRT2 as its major deacetylases. Inhibition of the deacetylases or impaired hypusination increased acetylation of eIF5A, leading to nuclear accumulation. As eIF5A is constitutively hypusinated under physiological conditions, we suggest that reversible acetylation plays a major role in controlling the subcellular localization of eIF5A.

22660415|a|The genomic stability of all organisms depends on the precise partition of chromosomes to daughter cells. The spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) senses unattached kinetochores and prevents premature entry to anaphase, thus ensuring that all chromosomes attach to opposite spindle poles (bi-orientation) during mitosis. MPS1 is an evolutionarily conserved protein kinase required for the SAC and chromosome bi-orientation. Yet, its primary cellular substrate has remained elusive. We show that fission yeast Mph1 (MPS1 homologue) phosphorylates the kinetochore protein Spc7 (KNL1/Blinkin homologue) at the MELT repeat sequences. This phosphorylation promotes the in vitro binding to the Bub1-Bub3 complex, which is required for kinetochore-based SAC activation (Mad1-Mad2-Mad3 localization) and chromosome alignment. Accordingly, a non-phosphorylatable spc7-12A mutation abolishes kinetochore targeting of Bub1-Bub3, whereas a phospho-mimetic spc7-12E mutation forces them to localize at kinetochores throughout the entire cell cycle, even in the absence of Mph1. Thus, MPS1/Mph1 kinase locating at the unattached kinetochores initially creates a mark, which is crucial for SAC activation and chromosome bi-orientation. This mechanism seems to be conserved in human cells.

25789606|a|Although numerous extracellular phosphoproteins have been identified, the protein kinases within the secretory pathway have only recently been discovered, and their regulation is virtually unexplored. Fam20C is the physiological Golgi casein kinase, which phosphorylates many secreted proteins and is critical for proper biomineralization. Fam20A, a Fam20C paralog, is essential for enamel formation, but the biochemical function of Fam20A is unknown. Here we show that Fam20A potentiates Fam20C kinase activity and promotes the phosphorylation of enamel matrix proteins in vitro and in cells. Mechanistically, Fam20A is a pseudokinase that forms a functional complex with Fam20C, and this complex enhances extracellular protein phosphorylation within the secretory pathway. Our findings shed light on the molecular mechanism by which Fam20C and Fam20A collaborate to control enamel formation, and provide the first insight into the regulation of secretory pathway phosphorylation. 

25759022|a|NF-κB is a critical link between inflammation and cancer, but whether long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) regulate its activation remains unknown. Here, we identify an NF-KappaB Interacting LncRNA (NKILA), which is upregulated by NF-κB, binds to NF-κB/IκB, and directly masks phosphorylation motifs of IκB, thereby inhibiting IKK-induced IκB phosphorylation and NF-κB activation. Unlike DNA that is dissociated from NF-κB by IκB, NKILA interacts with NF-κB/IκB to form a stable complex. Importantly, NKILA is essential to prevent over-activation of NF-κB pathway in inflammation-stimulated breast epithelial cells. Furthermore, low NKILA expression is associated with breast cancer metastasis and poor patient prognosis. Therefore, lncRNAs can directly interact with functional domains of signaling proteins, serving as a class of NF-κB modulators to suppress cancer metastasis. 

25619998|a|N-terminal acetylation is among the most common protein modifications in eukaryotes and is mediated by evolutionarily conserved N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). NatD is among the most selective NATs; its only known substrates are histones H4 and H2A, containing the N-terminal sequence SGRGK in humans. Here we characterize the molecular basis for substrate-specific acetylation by NatD by reporting its crystal structure bound to cognate substrates and performing related biochemical studies. A novel N-terminal segment wraps around the catalytic core domain to make stabilizing interactions, and the α1-α2 and β6-β7 loops adopt novel conformations to properly orient the histone N termini in the binding site. Ser1 and Arg3 of the histone make extensive contacts to highly conserved NatD residues in the substrate binding pocket, and flanking glycine residues also appear to contribute to substrate-specific binding by NatD, together defining a Ser-Gly-Arg-Gly recognition sequence. These studies have implications for understanding substrate-specific acetylation by NAT enzymes.

25728925|a|Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway substrate 15 (Eps15) is a newly identified substrate for protein tyrosine phosphatase N3 (PTPN3), which belongs to the FERM-containing PTP subfamily comprising five members including PTPN3, N4, N13, N14, and N21. We solved the crystal structures of the PTPN3-Eps15 phosphopeptide complex and found that His812 of PTPN3 and Pro850 of Eps15 are responsible for the specific interaction between them. We defined the critical role of the additional residue Tyr676 of PTPN3, which is replaced by Ile939 in PTPN14, in recognition of tyrosine phosphorylated Eps15. The WPD loop necessary for catalysis is present in all members but not PTPN21. We identified that Glu instead of Asp in the WPE loop contributes to the catalytic incapability of PTPN21 due to an extended distance beyond protonation targeting a phosphotyrosine substrate. Together with in vivo validations, our results provide novel insights into the substrate specificity and plasticity of FERM-containing PTPs. 

25621951|a|Multiple lines of evidence indicate that mitochondrial dysfunction is central to Parkinson's disease. Here we investigate the mechanism by which parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, and USP30, a mitochondrion-localized deubiquitylase, regulate mitophagy. We find that mitochondrial damage stimulates parkin to assemble Lys 6, Lys 11 and Lys 63 chains on mitochondria, and that USP30 is a ubiquitin-specific deubiquitylase with a strong preference for cleaving Lys 6- and Lys 11-linked multimers. Using mass spectrometry, we show that recombinant USP30 preferentially removes these linkage types from intact ubiquitylated mitochondria and counteracts parkin-mediated ubiquitin chain formation in cells. These results, combined with a series of chimaera and localization studies, afford insights into the mechanism by which a balance of ubiquitylation and deubiquitylation regulates mitochondrial homeostasis, and suggest a general mechanism for organelle autophagy.

15894542|a|The multifunctional cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) exerts many of its effects through its regulation of extracellular matrix components, including fibronectin (FN). Although expression of both TGFbeta and FN are essential for embryonic development and wound healing in the adult, overexpression leads to excessive deposition of extracellular matrix observed in many fibroproliferative disorders. We previously have demonstrated that TGFbeta-stimulated FN induction requires activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway; however, the signaling molecules that link the TGFbeta receptors to the JNK pathway remain unknown. We show here that the cytosolic adaptor protein disabled-2 (Dab2) directly stimulates JNK activity, whereas stable small interfering RNA-mediated ablation of Dab2 in NIH3T3 mouse fibroblasts and A10 rat aortic smooth muscle cells demonstrates that its expression is required for TGFbeta-mediated FN induction. We demonstrate that TGFbeta treatment stimulates the association of Dab2 with the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase, TAK1. Attenuation of cellular TAK1 levels by transient double-stranded RNA oligonucleotide transfection as well as overexpression of kinase-deficient TAK1 leads to abrogation of TGFbeta-stimulated FN induction. Furthermore, cell migration, another JNK-dependent response, is attenuated in NIH3T3-siDab2-expressing clones. We, therefore, delineate a signaling pathway proceeding from the TGFbeta receptors to Dab2 and TAK1, leading to TGFbeta-stimulated JNK activation, FN expression, and cell migration.

15557335|a|Alix/AIP1 is an adaptor protein involved in regulating the function of receptor and cytoskeleton-associated tyrosine kinases. Here, we investigated its interaction with and regulation by Src. Tyr319 of Alix bound the isolated Src homology-2 (SH2) domain and was necessary for interaction with intact Src. A proline-rich region in the C terminus of Alix bound the Src SH3 domain, but this interaction was dependent on the release of the Src SH2 domain from its Src internal ligand either by interaction with Alix Tyr319 or by mutation of Src Tyr527. Src phosphorylated Alix at a C-terminal region rich in tyrosines, an activity that was stimulated by the presence of the Alix binding partner SETA/CIN85. Phosphorylation of Alix by Src caused it to translocate from the membrane and cytoskeleton to the cytoplasm and reduced its interaction with binding partners SETA/CIN85, epidermal growth factor receptor, and Pyk2. As a consequence of this, Src antagonized the negative regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase internalization and cell adhesion by Alix. We propose a model whereby Src antagonizes the effects of Alix by phosphorylation of its C terminus, leading to the disruption of interactions with target proteins.

15733851|a|Recent work has shown that the LKB1 tumour suppressor protein kinase phosphorylates and activates protein kinases belonging to the AMP activated kinase (AMPK) subfamily. In this study, we identify the sucrose non-fermenting protein (SNF1)-related kinase (SNRK), a largely unstudied AMPK subfamily member, as a novel substrate for LKB1. We demonstrate that LKB1 activates SNRK by phosphorylating the T-loop residue (Thr173), and that the LKB1 regulatory subunits STRAD and MO25 are required for LKB1 to activate SNRK. We find that SNRK is not active when expressed in HeLa cells that lack expression of LKB1, and its activity is restored by expression of wild type LKB1, but not catalytically deficient LKB1. We also present evidence that two other AMPK-related kinases more distantly related to AMPK than SNRK, namely NIM1 and testis-specific serine/threonine kinase-1 (TSSK1) are not substrates for LKB1. Tissue distribution analysis indicates that SNRK protein is mainly expressed in testis, similar to TSSK isoforms, whereas NIM1 is more widely expressed. These results provide evidence that SNRK could mediate some of the physiological effects of LKB1.

15678106|a|p73, a member of the p53 family of transcription factors, is upregulated in response to DNA damage, inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Besides indications that this p73 response is post-transcriptional, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms of p73 protein degradation. Ubiquitination and proteasomal-dependent degradation of p53 are regulated by its transcriptional target MDM2. However, unlike p53, p73 binds to, but is not degraded by, MDM2. Here we describe the binding of p73 to Itch, a Hect ubiquitin-protein ligase. Itch selectively binds and ubiquitinates p73 but not p53; this results in the rapid proteasome-dependent degradation of p73. Upon DNA damage Itch itself is downregulated, allowing p73 protein levels to rise and thus interfere with p73 function. In conclusion, we have identified a key mechanism in the control of p73 protein levels both in normal as well as in stress conditions.

15527798|a|MDM2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase which mediates ubiquitylation and proteasome-dependent degradation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein. Phosphorylation of MDM2 by the protein kinase AKT is thought to regulate MDM2 function in response to survival signals, but there has been uncertainty concerning the identity of the sites phosphorylated by AKT. In the present study, we identify Ser-166, a site previously reported as an AKT target, and Ser-188, a novel site which is the major site of phosphorylation of MDM2 by AKT in vitro. Analysis of MDM2 in cultured cells confirms that Ser-166 and Ser-188 are phosphorylated by AKT in a physiological context.

15733859|a|Bcl-2 contains an unusually long loop between the first and the second helices. This loop has been shown to be highly flexible based on NMR and X-ray crystallographic analyses of this region. Bcl-2 is regulated at the posttranslational level through phosphorylation of specific residues within the flexible loop. The biological role and posttranslational modifications of the loop of Bcl-2 is currently unclear. FK-506 binding protein 38 (FKBP38) has been reported to interact with Bcl-2, suggesting that FKBP38 could act as a docking molecule to localize Bcl-2 at the mitochondrial membrane [Shirane, M. and Nakayama, K.I. (2003) Inherent calcineurin inhibitor FKBP38 targets Bcl-2 to mitochondria and inhibits apoptosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 5, 28-37]. Here, we investigated the molecular interaction between FKBP38 and Bcl-2, and demonstrated that Bcl-2 interacts with FKBP38 through the unstructured loop, and the interaction appears to regulate phosphorylation in the loop of Bcl-2.

15601262|a|IFNgamma (interferon-gamma) binding to its cognate receptor results, through JAK (Janus kinase), in direct activation of receptor-bound STAT1 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 1), although there is evidence for additional activation of a MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathway. In the present paper, we report IFNgamma-dependent activation of the MEKK4 (MAPK/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase kinase kinase 4) pathway in HaCaT human keratinocytes. MEKK4 is tyrosine-phosphorylated and the IFNgamma-dependent phosphorylation requires intracellular calcium. Calcium-dependent phosphorylation of MEKK4 is mediated by Pyk2. Moreover, MEKK4 and Pyk2 co-localize in an IFNgamma-dependent manner in the perinuclear region. Furthermore, the calcium-binding protein, annexin II, and the calcium-regulated kinase, Pyk2, co-immunoprecipitate with MEKK4 after treatment with IFNgamma. Immunofluorescence imaging of HaCaT cells shows an IFNgamma-dependent co-localization of annexin II with Pyk2 in the perinuclear region, suggesting that annexin II mediates the calcium-dependent regulation of Pyk2. Tyrosine phosphorylation of MEKK4 correlates with its activity to phosphorylate MKK6 (MAPK kinase 6) in vitro and subsequent p38 MAPK activation in an IFNgamma-dependent manner. Additional studies demonstrate that the SH2 (Src homology 2)-domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 co-immunoprecipitates with MEKK4 in an IFNgamma-dependent manner and co-localizes with MEKK4 after IFNgamma stimulation in the perinuclear region in HaCaT cells. Furthermore, we provide evidence that SHP2 dephosphorylates MEKK4 and Pyk2, terminating the MEKK4-dependent branch of the IFNgamma signalling pathway.

15556606|a|There is accumulating evidence that the estrogen receptor (ER) can transduce specific signals at the plasma membrane. We tried to clarify the biological function of ER as a signaling molecule by identifying proteins that interact with the membrane-localized ER. The activation function 1 and 2 (AF-1 and AF-2) domains of ERalpha with or without the membrane-targeting sequence were stably expressed in the breast cancer cell line, MCF-7. The level of tyrosine phosphorylation of AF-2 was significantly elevated by the membrane localization. By mass-spectrometry analysis, alpha- and beta-tubulins and heat shock protein 70 were identified as the AF-1-associated proteins. Of these, tubulins are associated only with membrane-targeted AF-1.

15581622|a|Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is a stress response protein that protects cells against diverse noxious stimuli. Although regulation of HO-1 occurs mainly at the transcriptional level, its posttranslational modifications remain unexplored. We have identified a putative consensus sequence for phosphorylation by Akt/PKB of HO-1 at Ser188. Recombinant human and rat HO-1, but not mutant HO-1(S188A), are phosphorylated in vitro by Akt/PKB. Isotopic 32P-labeling of HEK293T cells confirmed that HO-1 is a phosphoprotein and that the basal HO-1 phosphorylation is increased by Akt1 activation. HO-1(S188D), a single point mutant equivalent to the phosphorylated protein, exhibited over 1.6-fold higher activity than wild type HO-1. Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) studies indicated that HO-1(S188D) bound to cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) and biliverdin reductase (BVR) with a slightly lower Kd than wild-type HO-1. Although the changes in activity are small, this study provides the first evidence for a role of the survival kinase Akt in the regulation of HO-1.

15894168|a|This study investigates the role of tyrosine phosphorylation and dephosphorylation in the regulation of the Ca(2+) permeant TRPV6 channel. HEK293 cells co-transfected with TRPV6 and the tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B show a constitutive Ca(2+) entry which was independent of tyrosine phosphorylation under resting conditions. Following depletion of intracellular Ca(2+) stores, TRPV6-mediated Ca(2+) entry could be increased in the presence of a tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor (bis-(N,N-dimethyl-hydroxamido) hydroxo-vanadate; DMHV). Inhibition of Src-kinases completely abolished DMHV-induced increase in TRPV6-mediated Ca(2+) influx. Co-transfection with Src led to tyrosine phosphorylation of TRPV6 which could be dephosphorylated by PTP1B. In vivo interaction of TRPV6 with PTP1B was visualized using the bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) method and proved by co-immunoprecipitation of both proteins. These data indicate that tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in the regulation of the TRPV6 channel protein.

15821101|a|Upon leptin binding, the leptin receptor is activated, leading to stimulation of the JAK/STAT signal transduction cascade. The transient character of the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 and STAT3 suggests the involvement of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) as negative regulators of this signalling pathway. Specifically, recent evidence has suggested that PTP1B might be a key regulator of leptin signalling, based on the resistance to diet-induced obesity and increased leptin signalling observed in PTP1B-deficient mice. The present study was undertaken to investigate the mechanism by which PTP1B mediates the cessation of the leptin signal transduction. Leptin-induced activation of a STAT3 responsive reporter was dose-dependently inhibited by co-transfection with PTP1B. No inhibition was observed when a catalytically inactive mutant of PTP1B was used or when other PTPs were co-transfected. PTP1B was able to dephosphorylate activated JAK2 and STAT3 in vitro, whereas either no or a minimal effect was observed with cluster of differentiation 45 (CD45), PTPalpha and leukocyte antigen-related (LAR). By utilisation of a selective PTP1B inhibitor, the leptin-induced STAT3 activation was enhanced in cells. In conclusion, these results suggested that the negative regulatory role of PTP1B on leptin signalling is mediated through a direct and selective dephosphorylation of the two signalling molecules, JAK2 and STAT3.

15784622|a|Akt/protein kinase B is a major cell survival pathway through phosphorylation of proapoptotic proteins Bad and Bax and of additional apoptotic pathways linked to Forkhead proteins glycogen synthase kinase-3beta and ASK1. To further explore the mechanism by which Akt regulates cell survival, we identified an Akt interaction protein by yeast two-hybrid screening. It is highly homologous to ARG-binding protein 2 (ArgBP2) with splicing exon 8 of the coding region of the ArgBP2. As two splicing isoforms (ArgBP2alpha and -beta) of ArgBP2 have been identified (Wang, B., Golemis, E. A., and Kruh, G. D. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 17542-17550), it was named ArgBP2gamma. ArgBP2gamma contains four Akt phosphorylation consensus sites, a SoHo motif, and three Src homology (SH) 3 domains and binds to C-terminal proline-rich motifs of Akt through its first and second SH3 domains. It also interacts with p21-activated protein kinase (PAK1) via its first and third SH3 domains, indicating the SH3 domains of ArgBP2gamma as docking sites for Akt and PAK1. Akt phosphorylates ArgBP2gamma in vitro and in vivo. Expression of ArgBP2gamma induces PAK1 activity and overrides apoptosis induced by ectopic expression of Bad or DNA damage. Nonphosphorylatable ArgBP2gamma-4A and SH3 domain-truncated mutant ArgBP2gamma inhibit Akt-induced PAK1 activation and reduce Akt and PAK1 phosphorylation of Bad and antiapoptotic function. These data indicate that ArgBP2gamma is a physiological substrate of Akt, functions as an adaptor for Akt and PAK1, and plays a role in Akt/PAK1 cell survival pathway.

15588987|a|This section provides detailed protocols for peptide synthesis on membrane (SPOT) and describes the application of this technology to protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPs) substrate selectivity studies. Applications include PTP binding and dephosphorylation assays on phosphotyrosine peptides derived from known substrates, such as the insulin receptor (IR) autophosphorylation site, and on peptides from focused or random SPOT peptide libraries, to discover consensus binding motifs. Weak or transient interactions that cannot be revealed by regular SPOT binding can be uncovered using SPOT double synthesis (SPOT-DS), whereby two different peptides are synthesized on the same spot. In SPOT-DS, one peptide is a substrate for the enzyme, whose conversion is indicative of a transient interaction of the enzyme with the other (variable) peptide. Using SPOT-DS, three IR regions that interact with full-length PTP-1B in a non-phosphorylation-dependent manner were revealed. In order to further study multiple interaction sites, we have developed a strategy to synthesize up to four peptides per spot: "SPOT(4)". Finally, several examples are provided that illustrate how the SPOT technology can be used in kinase and protease selectivity studies as well.

15728831|a|Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are primary means for rapid regulation of a variety of neuronal functions, such as membrane excitability, neurotransmitter release, and gene expression. Voltage-gated Ca2+ channels are targets for phosphorylation by a variety of second messengers through activation of different types of protein kinases (PKs). Protein phosphatases (PPs), like PKs, are equally important in regulating Ca2+ channels in neurons. However, much less is understood about whether and how a particular type of PP contributes to regulating neuronal Ca2+ channel activities. This is primarily because of the lack of specific inhibitors/activators for different types of PPs, particularly the PP2c family. The functional roles of PP2c and its substrates in the brain remain virtually unknown. During our yeast two-hybrid screening, PP2calpha was pulled out by both N- and P/Q-type Ca2+ channel C termini. This raised the possibility that PP2calpha might be associated with voltage-gated Ca2+ channels for regulation of the Ca(2+) channel activity. Biochemical studies show that PP2calpha binds directly to neuronal Ca2+ channels forming a functional protein complex in vivo. PP2calpha, unlike PP1, PP2a and PP2b, is more effective in dephosphorylation of neuronal Ca2+ channels after their phosphorylation by PKC. In hippocampal neurons, disruption of the PP2calpha-Ca2+ channel interaction significantly enhances the response of Ca2+ channels to modulation by PKC. Thus, the PP2calpha-Ca2+ channel complex is responsible for rapid dephosphorylation of Ca2+ channels and may contribute to regulation of synaptic transmission in neurons.

15659806|a|Somatostatin (SST) controls the proliferation of a variety of cell types. Its effects are mediated by five G protein-coupled receptors (SSTR1-SSTR5), variably expressed in normal and cancer tissues. SST inhibition of cell proliferation can be exploited by both direct and indirect mechanisms: the main direct pathway involves the modulation of phosphotyrosine phosphatase (PTP) activity. Here we show that SST cytostatic activity is mediated by the activation of a receptor-like PTP, named PTPeta. The role of this PTP in the antiproliferative activity of SST in five glioma cell lines (C6, U87MG, U373MG, DBTRG05MG, and CAS1) and in four postsurgical human glioblastoma specimens, has been studied. SST inhibited growth only in C6 and U87MG that express PTPeta. In C6 cells, SST antiproliferative effects were reverted by pretreatment with pertussis toxin and vanadate, indicating the involvement of G proteins and PTPs. The role of PTPeta in the SST inhibitory effects was demonstrated by testing the PTPeta activity: it was increased by SST treatment and paralleled by inhibition of ERK1/2 activation. Since basic fibroblast growth factor-dependent MEK phosphorylation was not affected by SST, we propose a direct effect of SST-activated PTPeta on ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Finally, the SSTR mRNAs were identified in all of the 36 gliomas analyzed, whereas PTPeta expression was found in 33% of cases. Culturing four gliomas, a precise correlation between the expression of PTPeta and the SST antiproliferative effects was identified. In conclusion, in glioma cells, SST antiproliferative activity requires the expression and activation of PTPeta, which directly dephosphorylates ERK1/2.

15556646|a|Catalytic (SH1) domains of protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) demonstrate specificity for peptide substrates. Whether SH1 domains differentiate between tyrosines in a physiological substrate has not been confirmed. Using purified proteins, we studied the ability of Syk, Fyn, and Abl to differentiate between tyrosines in a common PTK substrate, c-Cbl. We found that each kinase produced a distinct pattern of c-Cbl phosphorylation, which altered the phosphotyrosine-dependent interactions between c-Cbl and CrkL or phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3-K). Our data support the concept that SH1 domains determine the final sites of phosphorylation once PTKs reach their target proteins.

15660133|a|Slingshot (SSH) phosphatases and LIM kinases (LIMK) regulate actin dynamics via a reversible phosphorylation (inactivation) of serine 3 in actin-depolymerizing factor (ADF) and cofilin. Here we demonstrate that a multi-protein complex consisting of SSH-1L, LIMK1, actin, and the scaffolding protein, 14-3-3zeta, is involved, along with the kinase, PAK4, in the regulation of ADF/cofilin activity. Endogenous LIMK1 and SSH-1L interact in vitro and co-localize in vivo, and this interaction results in dephosphorylation and downregulation of LIMK1 activity. We also show that the phosphatase activity of purified SSH-1L is F-actin dependent and is negatively regulated via phosphorylation by PAK4. 14-3-3zeta binds to phosphorylated slingshot, decreases the amount of slingshot that co-sediments with F-actin, but does not alter slingshot activity. Here we define a novel ADF/cofilin phosphoregulatory complex and suggest a new mechanism for the regulation of ADF/cofilin activity in mediating changes to the actin cytoskeleton.

15545284|a|p116Rip was originally found to be a RhoA-binding protein, but its function has been unknown. Here, we clarify the function of p116Rip. Two critical findings were made. First, we found that p116Rip activated the GTPase activity of RhoA in vitro and that p116Rip overexpression in cells consistently diminished the epidermal growth factor-induced increase in GTP-bound RhoA. Second, p116Rip activated the myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) activity of the holoenzyme. p116Rip did not activate the catalytic subunit alone, indicating that the activation is due to the binding of p116Rip to the myosin phosphatase targeting subunit MYPT1. Interestingly, the activation of phosphatase was specific to myosin as substrate, and p116Rip directly bound to myosin, thus facilitating myosin/MLCP interaction. The gene silencing of p116Rip consistently and significantly increased myosin phosphorylation as well as stress fiber formation in cells. Based upon these findings, we propose that p116Rip is an important regulatory component that controls the RhoA signaling pathway, thus regulating MLCP activity and myosin phosphorylation in cells.

15735685|a|The expression of the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase r-PTPeta is drastically reduced in rat and human malignant thyroid cells, whereas its restoration reverts the neoplastic phenotype of retrovirally transformed rat thyroid cells. Moreover, reduced levels and loss of heterozygosity of DEP-1, the human homolog of r-PTPeta, have been found in many human neoplasias. Here, we report that the r-PTPeta protein binds to c-Src in living cells and dephosphorylates the c-Src inhibitory tyrosine phosphorylation site (Tyr 529), thereby increasing c-Src tyrosine kinase activity in malignant rat thyroid cells stably transfected with r-PTPeta. Tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and paxillin was enhanced in r-PTPeta-expressing cells. This was associated with increased adhesion of malignant r-PTPeta-transfected thyroid cells vs both untransfected cells and cells stably transfected with an inactive r-PTPeta mutant. Treatment of rat thyroid cells with the c-Src inhibitor PP2 decreased cell adhesion to a higher extent in r-PTPeta-transfected cells than in mock-transfected or stably transfected cells with the inactive r-PTPeta mutant, indicating that r-PTPeta regulates cell-substratum adhesion by activating c-Src. Interestingly, the extent of both c-Src dephosphorylation at Tyr 529, FAK and paxillin phosphorylation, and the increased cell adhesion were associated with the degree of r-PTPeta expression.

15733869|a|To maintain homeostasis, cells often respond to stressful extra-cellular stimuli by new gene expression. Serum/glucocorticoid-induced kinase (SGK) is an immediate early gene whose expression is induced by a variety of extra-cellular stimuli. Here, we examine the possibility that SGK can directly phosphorylate the transcription factor cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB). In a cell-free context, SGK physically associates with CREB and SGK phosphorylates it on serine 133. Phospho-serine 133 is essential for stimulating the transcriptional activity of CREB. Further, we show that in a variety of cellular contexts, SGK phosphorylates CREB. Activation of receptor tyrosine kinase pathways or the phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) lead to SGK-dependent CREB phosphorylation. Hormonal stimulation of epithelial cells leads to the induction of endogenous SGK and CREB phosphorylation. A dominant-negative form of SGK blocks dexamethasone-induced CREB phosphorylation. Our studies indicate that stimulation of SGK can lead to CREB phosphorylation, suggesting that CREB-dependent gene transcription is an important link between stressful extra-cellular signals and cellular responses.

15536091|a|The Src homology 3 (SH3) domain of Fyn binds to a conserved PXXP motif on microtubule-associated protein-2. Co-transfections into COS7 cells and in vitro kinase assays performed with Fyn and wild-type, or mutant MAP-2c, determined that Fyn phosphorylated MAP-2c on tyrosine 67. The phosphorylation generated a consensus sequence for the binding of the SH2 domain of Grb2 (pYSN). Pull-down assays with SH2-Grb2 from human fetal brain homogenates, and co-immunoprecipitation of Grb2 and MAP-2 confirmed the interaction in vivo, and demonstrated that MAP-2c is tyrosine-phosphorylated in human fetal brain. Filter overlay assays confirmed that the SH2 domain of Grb2 binds to human MAP-2c following incubation with active Fyn. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays confirmed the interaction between the SH2 domain of Grb2 and a tyrosine-phosphorylated MAP-2 peptide spanning the pY(67)SN motif. Thus, MAP-2c can directly recruit multiple signaling proteins important for central nervous system development.

15710384|a|The Rho-family of small GTPases consists of essential regulators of neurite outgrowth, axonal pathfinding, and dendritic arborization. Previous work has demonstrated in non-neuronal cell types that Smurf1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, regulates cell polarity and protrusive activity via PKCzeta-dependent recruitment to cellular protrusion sites, and subsequent ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of RhoA. In this study, we show that Smurf1 enhances neurite outgrowth in Neuro2a neuroblastoma cells. We demonstrate that RhoA is ubiquitinated, and that Smurf1 and RhoA physically interact in vivo. Interestingly, Smurf1 overexpression in Neuro2a cells dramatically reduces RhoA protein levels during dibutyric cyclic AMP, but not retinoic acid induced neurite outgrowth. This Smurf1-dependent reduction in RhoA protein levels was abrogated using the general proteasome inhibitor MG132, suggesting that RhoA is targeted for ubiquitination and degradation via Smurf1. Together, our data suggest that localized regulation of different subsets of Rho GTPases by specific guidance signals results in an intracellular asymmetry of RhoA activity, which could regulate neurite outgrowth and guidance.

15862297|a|By GST pull downs and co-immunoprecipitation analyses we found that recombinant Chk2 and HDM2 can form stable complexes in vitro. Chk2/HDM2 complexes were also detected in transfected Cos-1 cells over-expressing both proteins. Furthermore, we show that HDM2, as would be expected, severely affects the Chk2-catalyzed phosphorylation of p53. HDM2 itself is only slightly phosphorylated by Chk2. However, whereas HDM2 inhibits the Chk2-catalyzed p53 phosphorylation, HDM2 phosphorylation by Chk2 doubles in the presence of p53. The significance of the HDM2 phosphorylation is unknown, but it is possible that it might influence the stability of the HDM2/p53 complex.

15530371|a|CDK7, a member of the cyclin-dependent protein kinase family, regulates the activities of other CDKs through phosphorylation on their activation segment and hence contributes to control of the eukaryotic cell cycle. CDK7 also assists in the regulation of transcription as part of the transcription factor TFIIH complex. For maximum activity and stability, CDK7 requires phosphorylation, association with cyclin H, and association with a third protein, MAT1. We have determined the crystal structure of human CDK7 in complex with ATP at 3 A resolution. The kinase is in the inactive conformation, similar to that observed for inactive CDK2. The activation segment is phosphorylated at Thr170 and is in a defined conformation that differs from that in phospho-CDK2 and phospho-CDK2/cyclin A. The functional properties of the enzyme against CDK2 and CTD as substrates are characterized through kinase assays. Experiments confirm that CDK7 is not a substrate for kinase-associated phosphatase.

29187402|a|As a component of the transcriptional repression complex 1 (PRC1), the ring finger protein RING1 participates in the epigenetic regulation in cancer. However, the contributions of RING1 to cancer etiology or development are unknown. In this study, we report that RING1 is a critical negative regulator of p53 homeostasis in human hepatocellular and colorectal carcinomas. RING1 acts as an E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase to directly interact with and ubiquitinate p53, resulting in its proteasome-dependent degradation. The RING domain of RING1 was required for its E3 Ub ligase activity. RING1 depletion inhibited the proliferation and survival of the p53 wild-type cancer cells by inducing cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis, and senescence, with only modest effects on p53-deficient cells. Its growth inhibitory effect was partially rescued by p53 silencing, suggesting an important role for the RING1-p53 complex in human cancer. In clinical specimens of hepatocellular carcinoma, RING1 upregulation was evident in association with poor clinical outcomes. Collectively, our results elucidate a novel PRC1-independent function of RING1 and provide a mechanistic rationale for its candidacy as a new prognostic marker and/or therapeutic target in human cancer.

15695390|a|The cadherin family of transmembrane glycoproteins plays a critical role in cell-to-cell adhesion and cadherin dysregulation is strongly associated with cancer metastasis and progression. In this study, we report a novel interaction between protein kinase D1 [PKD1; formerly known as protein kinase C mu (PKCmu)] and E-cadherin. PKD1 is a serine/threonine-specific kinase known to play a role in multiple cellular processes including apoptosis, cytoskeleton remodeling, and invasion. Our study shows that PKD1 colocalizes with E-cadherin at cell junctions in LNCaP prostate cancer cells and coimmunoprecipitates with E-cadherin from lysates of LNCaP cells. In vitro kinase assays have shown that PKD1 phosphorylates E-cadherin. Inhibition of PKD1 activity by the selective inhibitor Gö6976 in LNCaP cells resulted in decreased cellular aggregation and overexpression of PKD1 in C4-2 prostate cancer cells increased cellular aggregation and decreased cellular motility. We also validated the PKD1 and E-cadherin colocalization in human prostate cancer tissue by confocal laser scanning microscopy. Our study has identified E-cadherin as a novel substrate of PKD1, and phosphorylation of E-cadherin by PKD1 is associated with increased cellular aggregation and decreased cellular motility in prostate cancer. Because both E-cadherin and PKD1 are known to be dysregulated in prostate cancer, our study identified an important protein-protein interaction influencing the signal transduction system associated with cell adhesion in prostate cancer.

15550563|a|Sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase (CYP8B1) catalyzes cholic acid synthesis in the liver and is feedback inhibited by bile acids. In addition to activating farnesoid X receptor (nuclear receptor subfamily 1H4), bile acids also induce inflammatory cytokines in hepatocytes. The objective of this study was to investigate the mechanism by which inflammatory cytokines inhibit human CYP8B1 gene transcription. Real-time PCR assays revealed that both chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) markedly reduced CYP8B1, cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase CYP7A1 and hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) mRNA expression levels in human primary hepatocytes. However, CDCA induced, but IL-1beta reduced, small heterodimer partner (SHP) mRNA expression. IL-1beta inhibited human CYP8B1 reporter activity only in liver cells, and a c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK)-specific inhibitor-blocked IL-1beta inhibition. Activated JNK1 or c-Jun inhibited, whereas their dominant negative forms blocked, IL-1beta inhibition of CYP8B1 transcription. Mutagenesis analyses mapped an IL-1beta response element to a previously identified bile acid response element, which contains an HNF4alpha binding site. A dominant negative HNF4alpha inhibited CYP8B1 gene transcription and ectopically expressed HNF4alpha blocked IL-1beta inhibition. Furthermore, IL-1beta inhibited HNF4alpha gene transcription, protein expression, and binding to the CYP8B1 gene. JNK1 phosphorylated HNF4alpha and a JNK-specific inhibitor blocked the IL-1beta inhibition of HNF4alpha expression. These results suggest that IL-1beta inhibits CYP8B1 gene transcription via a mitogen-activated protein kinase/JNK pathway that inhibits HNF4alpha gene expression and its DNA-binding ability. This mechanism may play an important role in the adaptive response to inflammatory cytokines and in the protection of the liver during cholestasis.

15598648|a|Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is caused by a CTG expansion in the 3'-untranslated region of a protein kinase gene (DMPK). Cardiovascular disease is one of the most prevalent causes of death in DM patients. Electrophysiological studies in cardiac muscles from DM patients and from DMPK(-/-) mice suggested that DMPK is critical to the modulation of cardiac contractility and to the maintenance of proper cardiac conduction activity. However, there are no data regarding the molecular signaling pathways involved in DM heart failure. Here we show that DMPK expression in cardiac myocytes is highly enriched in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) where it colocalizes with the ryanodine receptor and phospholamban (PLN), a muscle-specific SR Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) inhibitor. Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that DMPK and PLN can physically associate. Furthermore, purified wild-type DMPK, but not a kinase-deficient mutant (K110A DMPK), phosphorylates PLN in vitro. Subsequent studies using the DMPK(-/-) mice demonstrated that PLN is hypo-phosphorylated in SR vesicles from DMPK(-/-) mice compared with wild-type mice both in vitro and in vivo. Finally, we show that Ca(2+) uptake in SR is impaired in ventricular homogenates from DMPK(-/-) mice. Together, our data suggest the existence of a novel regulatory DMPK pathway for cardiac contractility and provide a molecular mechanism for DM heart pathology.

15951562|a|The tumor suppressor phosphatase PTEN is a key regulator of cell growth and apoptosis that interacts with PDZ domains from regulatory proteins, including MAGI-1/2/3, hDlg, and MAST205. Here we identified novel PTEN-binding PDZ domains within the MAST205-related proteins, syntrophin-associated serine/threonine kinase and MAST3, characterized the regions of PTEN involved in its interaction with distinctive PDZ domains, and analyzed the functional consequences on PTEN of PDZ domain binding. Using a panel of PTEN mutations, as well as PTEN chimeras containing distinct domains of the related protein TPTE, we found that the PTP and C2 domains of PTEN do not affect PDZ domain binding and that the C-terminal tail of PTEN (residues 350-403) provides selectivity to recognize specific PDZ domains from MAGI-2, hDlg, and MAST205. Binding of PTEN to the PDZ-2 domain from MAGI-2 increased PTEN protein stability. Furthermore, binding of PTEN to the PDZ domains from microtubule-associated serine/threonine kinases facilitated PTEN phosphorylation at its C terminus by these kinases. Our results suggest an important role for the C-terminal region of PTEN in the selective association with scaffolding and/or regulatory molecules and provide evidence that PDZ domain binding stabilizes PTEN and targets this tumor suppressor for phosphorylation by microtubule-associated serine/threonine kinases.

28445460|a|Nine neurodegenerative diseases are caused by expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) tracts in different proteins, such as huntingtin in Huntington's disease and ataxin 3 in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3). Age at onset of disease decreases with increasing polyglutamine length in these proteins and the normal length also varies. PolyQ expansions drive pathogenesis in these diseases, as isolated polyQ tracts are toxic, and an N-terminal huntingtin fragment comprising exon 1, which occurs in vivo as a result of alternative splicing, causes toxicity. Although such mutant proteins are prone to aggregation, toxicity is also associated with soluble forms of the proteins. The function of the polyQ tracts in many normal cytoplasmic proteins is unclear. One such protein is the deubiquitinating enzyme ataxin 3 (refs 7, 8), which is widely expressed in the brain. Here we show that the polyQ domain enables wild-type ataxin 3 to interact with beclin 1, a key initiator of autophagy. This interaction allows the deubiquitinase activity of ataxin 3 to protect beclin 1 from proteasome-mediated degradation and thereby enables autophagy. Starvation-induced autophagy, which is regulated by beclin 1, was particularly inhibited in ataxin-3-depleted human cell lines and mouse primary neurons, and in vivo in mice. This activity of ataxin 3 and its polyQ-mediated interaction with beclin 1 was competed for by other soluble proteins with polyQ tracts in a length-dependent fashion. This competition resulted in impairment of starvation-induced autophagy in cells expressing mutant huntingtin exon 1, and this impairment was recapitulated in the brains of a mouse model of Huntington's disease and in cells from patients. A similar phenomenon was also seen with other polyQ disease proteins, including mutant ataxin 3 itself. Our data thus describe a specific function for a wild-type polyQ tract that is abrogated by a competing longer polyQ mutation in a disease protein, and identify a deleterious function of such mutations distinct from their propensity to aggregate.

15870294|a|Here we describe and characterize a small serine/threonine kinase (SSTK) which consists solely of the N- and C-lobes of a protein kinase catalytic domain. SSTK protein is highly conserved among mammals, and no close homologues were found in the genomes of nonmammalian organisms. SSTK specifically interacts with HSP90-1beta, HSC70, and HSP70 proteins, and this association appears to be required for SSTK kinase activity. The SSTK transcript was most abundant in human and mouse testes but was also detected in all human tissues tested. In the mouse testis, SSTK protein was localized to the heads of elongating spermatids. Targeted deletion of the SSTK gene in mice resulted in male sterility due to profound impairment in motility and morphology of spermatozoa. A defect in DNA condensation in SSTK null mutants occurred in elongating spermatids at a step in spermiogenesis coincident with chromatin displacement of histones by transition proteins. SSTK phosphorylated histones H1, H2A, H2AX, and H3 but not H2B or H4 or transition protein 1 in vitro. These results demonstrate that SSTK is required for proper postmeiotic chromatin remodeling and male fertility. Abnormal sperm chromatin condensation is common in sterile men, and our results may provide insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying certain human infertility disorders.

15741320|a|Upon activation by far-red light, phytochrome A signals are transduced through several pathways to promote photomorphogenesis. The COP1 E3 ligase represses photomorphogenesis in part by targeting transcription activators such as LAF1 and HY5 for destruction. Another positive regulator of photomorphogenesis is HFR1, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor. Here, we show that HFR1 colocalizes with COP1 in nuclear bodies, and that the HFR1 N-terminal region (amino acids 1-131) interacts with the COP1 WD40 domain. HFR1(DeltaN), an HFR1 mutant lacking the two N-terminal, COP1-interacting motifs, still localizes in nuclear bodies and retains weak affinity for COP1. Both HFR1 and HFR1(DeltaN) can be ubiquitinated by COP1, although with different efficiencies. Expression of 35S-HFR1(DeltaN) in wild-type plants confers greater hypersensitivity to FR than 35S-HFR1 expression, and only seedlings expressing 35S-HFR1(DeltaN) display constitutive photomorphogenesis. These phenotypic differences can be attributed to the instability of HFR1 compared with HFR1(DeltaN). In transgenic plants, HFR1 levels are significantly elevated upon induced expression of a dominant-negative COP1 mutant that interferes with endogenous COP1 E3 activity. Moreover, induced expression of wild-type COP1 in transgenic plants accelerates post-translational degradation of HFR1 under FR light. Taken together, our results show that HFR1 is ubiquitinated by COP1 E3 ligase and marked for post-translational degradation during photomorphogenesis.

15896299|a|The regulation of PLD2 activation is poorly understood at present. Transient transfection of COS-7 with a mycPLD2 construct results in elevated levels of PLD2 enzymatic activity and tyrosyl phosphorylation. To investigate whether this phosphorylation affects PLD2 enzymatic activity, anti-myc immunoprecipitates were treated with recombinant protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B. Surprisingly, lipase activity and PY levels both increased over a range of PTP1B concentrations. These increases occurred in parallel to a measurable PTP1B-associated phosphatase activity. Inhibitor studies demonstrated that an EGF-receptor type kinase is involved in phosphorylation. In a COS-7 cell line created in the laboratory that stably expressed myc-PLD2, PTP1B induced a robust (>6-fold) augmentation of myc-PLD2 phosphotyrosine content. The addition of growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) to cell extracts also elevated PY levels of myc-PLD (>10-fold). Systematic co-immunoprecipitation-immunoblotting experiments pointed at a physical association between PLD2, Grb2, and PTP1B in both physiological conditions and in overexpressed cells. This is the first report of a demonstration of the mammalian isoform PLD2 existing in a ternary complex with a protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTP1b, and the docking protein Grb2 which greatly enhances tyrosyl phosphorylation of the lipase.

15752768|a|To explore more possible roles for GSK3beta function, the yeast two-hybrid screening using GSK3beta as a bait protein was performed. In this study, we demonstrated that two variants of CABYR (281 and 379) interacted with GSK3beta in the yeast two-hybrid and GST pull down assay. Molecular characterization showed that CABYR variants formed a dimer with a proline-rich extensin-like domain, which slightly overlapped with GSK3beta-binding site. In kinase assay, we also showed that CABYR variants act as an ideal substrate for GSK3beta within the extensin-like domain and phosphorylation sites on CABYR were mapped. Interestingly, Northern blot showed that CABYR transcripts were expressed more distinctly in the fetal brain than in the adult brain, suggesting that this protein may play a role during brain development. Moreover, differential expression of CABYR variants may exhibit aberrant expression in brain tumors and cancer cell lines.

15749833|a|Interleukin-1 (IL-1) mediates numerous host responses through the rapid activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B), but the signal pathways leading to NF-kappa B activation are regulated at multiple stages. Here, we propose a novel regulatory system for IL-1-induced NF-kappa B activation by a tyrosine kinase, c-Src. The kinase activity of c-Src increases in an IL-1-dependent manner and the ectopic expression of c-Src augments IL-1-induced NF-kappa B activation, suggesting the involvement of c-Src in IL-1 signaling. However, a Src family inhibitor, PP2 failed to inhibit IL-1-induced NF-kappa B activation, and the expression of a c-Src mutant lacking kinase activity (c-Src KD) augmented IL-1-induced NF-kappa B activation as well as wild type c-Src, indicating that the tyrosine kinase activity is not required for IL-1-induced NF-kappa B activation. Furthermore, a physiological interaction between c-Src and I kappa B kinase gamma (IKK gamma) was observed, implying the involvement of c-Src in the IKK-complex. While c-Src augmented IL-1-induced IKK activation independent of its kinase activity, the region comprising amino acids 361-440 in the c-Src kinase domain are required for NF-kappa B activation. The same region of c-Src is also required for IL-1-induced IKK activation and the association with IKK gamma. Taken together, our results suggest that c-Src plays a critical role in IL-1-induced NF-kappa B activation through the IKK complex.

15886098|a|ABL tyrosine kinases control actin remodeling in development and in response to environmental stimuli. These changes affect cell adhesion, cell migration, and cell-cell contact. Little is known, however, about upstream mechanisms regulating ABL protein activation.

21556048|a|The MEF2 factors regulate transcription during cardiac and skeletal myogenesis. MEF2 factors establish skeletal muscle commitment by amplifying and synergizing with MyoD. While phosphorylation is known to regulate MEF2 function, lineage-specific regulation is unknown. Here, we show that phosphorylation of MEF2C on T(80) by skeletal myosin light chain kinase (skMLCK) enhances skeletal and not cardiac myogenesis. A phosphorylation-deficient MEF2C mutant (MEFT80A) enhanced cardiac, but not skeletal myogenesis in P19 stem cells. Further, MEFT80A was deficient in recruitment of p300 to skeletal but not cardiac muscle promoters. In gain-of-function studies, skMLCK upregulated myogenic regulatory factor (MRF) expression, leading to enhanced skeletal myogenesis in P19 cells and more efficient myogenic conversion. In loss-of-function studies, MLCK was essential for efficient MRF expression and subsequent myogenesis in embryonic stem (ES) and P19 cells as well as for proper activation of quiescent satellite cells. Thus, skMLCK regulates MRF expression by controlling the MEF2C-dependent recruitment of histone acetyltransferases to skeletal muscle promoters. This work identifies the first kinase that regulates MyoD and Myf5 expression in ES or satellite cells.

15542844|a|Variations in intracellular levels of p53 regulate many cellular functions and determine tumor susceptibility. Major mechanisms modulating p53 levels include phosphorylation and interaction of p53 with specific ubiquitin ligases that promote its degradation. N-terminal phosphorylation regulates the interaction of p53 with several regulatory molecules. Vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) is the prototype of a new Ser-Thr kinase family in the human kinome. VRK1 is located in the nucleus outside the nucleolus. Overexpression of VRK1 increases the stability of p53 by a posttranslational mechanism leading to its accumulation by a mechanism independent of the Chk2 kinase. Catalytically inactive VRK1 protein (a K179E mutant) does not induce p53 accumulation. VRK1 phosphorylates human p53 in Thr18 and disrupts p53-Mdm2 interaction in vitro, although a significant decrease in p53 ubiquitination by Mdm2 in vivo was not detected. VRK1 kinase does not phosphorylate Mdm2. VRK1-mediated p53 stabilization was also detected in Mdm2(-/-) cells. VRK1 also has an additive effect with MdmX or p300 to stabilize p53, and p300 coactivation and acetylation of p53 is enhanced by VRK1. The p53 stabilized by VRK1 is transcriptionally active. Suppression of VRK1 expression by specific small interfering RNA provokes several defects in proliferation, situating the protein in the regulation of this process. VRK1 might function as a switch controlling the proteins that interact with p53 and thus modifying its stability and activity. We propose VRK1 as the first step in a new pathway regulating p53 activity during cell proliferation.

15591124|a|Phosphorylation of the reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase components p67phox and p47phox accompanies the assembly and activation of this enzyme complex. We have previously reported that activation of human monocytes with opsonized zymosan (ZOP), a potent stimulator of NADPH oxidase activity, results in the phosphorylation of p67phox and p47phox. In this study, we investigated the regulation of p67phox phosphorylation. Although protein kinase C (PKC)alpha has previously been shown to regulate NADPH oxidase activity, we found that inhibition of PKCalpha had no effect on p67phox phosphorylation. Our studies demonstrate that pretreatment of monocytes with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides specific for PKCdelta or rottlerin, a selective inhibitor for PKCdelta, inhibited the phosphorylation of p67phox in monocytes, and Go6976, a specific inhibitor for conventional PKCs, PKCalpha and PKCbeta, had no such inhibitory effect. Additional studies indicate that ZOP stimulation of monocytes induces PKCdelta and p67phox to form a complex. We also demonstrate that lysates from activated monocytes as well as PKCdelta immunoprecipitates from activated monocytes can phosphorylate p67phox in vitro and that pretreatment of monocytes with rottlerin blocked the phosphorylation in each case. We further show that recombinant PKCdelta can phosphorylate p67phox in vitro. Finally, we show that PKCdelta-deficient monocytes produce significantly less superoxide anion in response to ZOP stimulation, thus emphasizing the functional significance of the PKCdelta regulation of p67phox phosphorylation. Taken together, this is the first report to describe the requirement of PKCdelta in regulating the phosphorylation of p67phox and the related NADPH oxidase activity in primary human monocytes.

15546919|a|ARAP3 is a GTPase activating protein (GAP) for Rho and Arf GTPases that is implicated in phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) signalling pathways controlling lamellipodia formation and actin stress fibre assembly. We have identified ARAP3 as a phosphorylated target of protein tyrosine kinases. In cells, ARAP3 was tyrosine phosphorylated when co-expressed with Src-family kinases (SFKs), upon stimulation with growth factors and during adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM) substrate fibronectin. Adhesion-induced phosphorylation of ARAP3 was suppressed by selective inhibitors of Src-family kinases and PI 3-kinase and by a Src dominant interfering mutant. Inducible expression of ARAP3 in HEK293 epithelial cells resulted in increased cell rounding, membrane process formation and cell clustering on ECM substrates. In contrast, ARAP3 dramatically slowed the kinetics of cell spreading on fibronectin but had no effect on cell adhesion. These effects of ARAP3 required a functional Rho GAP domain and were associated with reduced cellular levels of active RhoA and Rac1 but did not require the sterile alpha motif (SAM) or Arf GAP domains. Mutation of two phosphorylation sites, Y1399 and Y1404, enhanced some ARAP3 activities, suggesting that ARAP3 may be negatively regulated by phosphorylation on these tyrosine residues. These results implicate ARAP3 in integrin-mediated tyrosine kinase signalling pathways controlling Rho GTPases and cell spreading.

21527912|a|Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and associated with progressive deposition of amyloid β-peptides (Aβ) in the brain. Aβ derives by sequential proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein by β- and γ-secretases. Rare mutations that lead to amino-acid substitutions within or close to the Aβ domain promote the formation of neurotoxic Aβ assemblies and can cause early-onset AD. However, mechanisms that increase the aggregation of wild-type Aβ and cause the much more common sporadic forms of AD are largely unknown. Here, we show that extracellular Aβ undergoes phosphorylation by protein kinases at the cell surface and in cerebrospinal fluid of the human brain. Phosphorylation of serine residue 8 promotes formation of oligomeric Aβ assemblies that represent nuclei for fibrillization. Phosphorylated Aβ was detected in the brains of transgenic mice and human AD brains and showed increased toxicity in Drosophila models as compared with non-phosphorylated Aβ. Phosphorylation of Aβ could represent an important molecular mechanism in the pathogenesis of the most common sporadic form of AD.

16212962|a|We address here the involvement of the homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2)/p53 complex on MDM2 regulation following apoptotic DNA damage. Our results provide a plausible transcriptional (p53-dependent) and posttranscriptional (p53-independent) double mechanism by which HIPK2 accomplishes MDM2 downmodulation. First, in wtp53-carrying cells HIPK2-dependent p53Ser46 phosphorylation selectively inhibits MDM2 at transcriptional level. Secondly, HIPK2 interacts with MDM2 in vitro and in vivo and promotes MDM2 nuclear export and proteasomal degradation, in p53-null cellular context. This p53-independent effect is likely mediated by HIPK2 catalytic activity and we found that HIPK2 phosphorylates MDM2 in vitro. In response to DNA damage, depletion of HIPK2 by RNA-interference abolishes MDM2 protein degradation. We propose that HIPK2 contributes to drug-induced modulation of MDM2 activity at transcriptional (through p53Ser46 phosphorylation) and posttranscriptional (through p53-independent subcellular re-localization and proteasomal degradation) levels.

16288922|a|PAC-1 is an inducible, nuclear-specific, dual-specificity mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase that has been shown recently to be a transcription target of the human tumor-suppressor protein p53 in signaling apoptosis and growth suppression. However, its substrate specificity and regulation of catalytic activity thus far remain elusive. Here, we report in vitro characterization of PAC-1 phosphatase activity with three distinct MAP kinase subfamilies. We show that the recombinant PAC-1 exists in a virtually inactive state when alone in vitro, and dephosphorylates extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) but not p38alpha or c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase 2 (JNK2). ERK2 dephosphorylation by PAC-1 requires association of its amino-terminal domain with ERK2 that results in catalytic activation of the phosphatase. p38alpha also interacts with but does not activate PAC-1, whereas JNK2 does not bind to or cause catalytic activation by PAC-1. Moreover, our structure-based analysis reveals that individual mutation of the conserved Arg294 and Arg295 that likely comprise the phosphothreonine-binding pocket in PAC-1 to either alanine or lysine results in a nearly complete loss of its phosphatase activity even in the presence of ERK2. These results suggest that Arg294 and Arg295 play an important role in PAC-1 catalytic activation induced by ERK2 binding.

16101282|a|Although protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are significant negative regulators of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)-initiated cell signaling, it is unknown how RTK oligomerization modulates the equilibrium established between kinase and phosphatase activity. To determine the impact of oligomerization on the ability of c-MET RTK to undergo dephosphorylation, we examined the relative dephosphorylation kinetics of similarly phosphorylated dimeric TPR-MET and monomeric cytoMET. Notably, we observed that the dephosphorylation kinetics of phosphorylated MET were significantly modulated by its oligomeric state, with the global dephosphorylation rate of TPR-MET severalfold slower than the dephosphorylation rate of monomeric cytoMET. Furthermore, there were important site-specific differences in the dephosphorylation patterns of cytoMET and TPR-MET. Reduced dephosphorylation activity was predicted to eliminate or reduce the requirement of ligand-dependent oligomerization for MET autophosphorylation. This was demonstrated by the rapid phosphorylation of unstimulated c-MET on its activation loop and carboxy-terminal tyrosines following pervanadate treatment of cells expressing c-MET. We conclude that the MET oligomerization state is a critical regulator of its dephosphorylation rate. Thus, oligomerization plays a role in modifying the receptor's kinase and dephosphorylation rates to change the equilibrium levels of phosphorylated and dephosphorylated receptor in response to ligand stimulation, and that this may be a general mechanism utilized by many oligomeric receptor tyrosine kinases for regulation of their activity.

16159897|a|Recent studies have shown that accessory proteins that interact with the apical Na(+)/H+ exchanger NHE3 are a vital part of the dynamic nature of the Na(+)/H+ exchanger regulation. We have identified MAST205, a microtubule-associated serine/threonine kinase with a molecular mass of 205 kDa that interacts with NHE3. MAST205 contains a S/T kinase domain and a PDZ domain that mediates interaction with NHE3. Northern blot analysis showed that MAST205 is highly expressed in human and rat kidney. Expression in opossum kidney (OK) cells showed that MAST205 is predominantly expressed in the apical membrane of the cells. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated the presence of MAST205 at the apical region of the renal proximal tubules. Heterologous expression of MAST205 in OK cells inhibited endogenous NHE3 activity, and this inhibition required the presence of the kinase domain of MAST205, since deletion of the kinase domain or a dominant-negative mutant of MAST205 did not affect the activity of NHE3. Consistent with these results, we found that MAST205 phosphorylated NHE3 under in vitro conditions. However, overexpression of MAST205 did not affect expression of NHE3 proteins, suggesting that the effect of MAST205 was not mediated by a decrease in NHE3 expression. These findings suggest that MAST205 regulates NHE3 activity and, although the precise mechanism is yet to be determined, MAST205 appears to inhibit NHE3 activity through a phosphorylation-dependent mechanism.

16198352|a|The hypoxia responsive region (HRR) of the VEGF promoter plays a key role in regulating VEGF expression. We found that the cold shock domain (Y-box) repressor proteins, dbpA and dbpB/YB-1, bind distinct strands of the human VEGF HRR. We find both dbpA and dbpB are phosphorylated by ERK2 and GSK3beta in vitro, and the binding of dbpB to single-strand VEGF HRR DNA is regulated by this phosphorylation. These findings suggest the ERK/MAPK and PI3K pathways may regulate VEGF expression in part through regulating the action of these repressor proteins.

21658387|a|LRRK2 is the causal molecule for autosomal-dominant familial Parkinson's disease, although its true function, including its physiological substrates, remains unknown. Here, using in vitro kinase assay with recombinant proteins, we demonstrated for the first time that LRRK2 directly phosphorylates Akt1, a central molecule involved in signal transduction for cell survival and prevention of apoptosis. Ser473, one of two amino acids essential for Akt1 activation, was the target site for LRRK2. A knockdown experiment using intact cells also demonstrated LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of Akt1 (Ser473), suggesting that Akt1 is a convincing candidate for the physiological substrate of LRRK2. The disease-associated mutations, R1441C, G2019S, and I2020T, exhibited reduced interaction with, and phosphorylation of, Akt1, suggesting one possible mechanism for the neurodegeneration caused by LRRK2 mutations.

16213503|a|A genome wide search for new BH3-containing Bcl-2 family members was conducted using position weight matrices (PWM) and identified a large (480kDa), novel BH3-only protein, originally called LASU1 (now also known as Ureb-1, E3(histone), ARF-BP1, and Mule). We demonstrated that LASU1 is an E3 ligase that ubiquitinated Mcl-1 in vitro and was required for its proteasome-dependent degradation in HeLa cells. Of note, the BH3 domain of LASU1 interacted with Mcl-1 but not with Bcl-2 or Bcl-Xl. A competing BH3-ligand derived from Bim interacted with Mcl-1 and prevented its interaction with LASU1 in HeLa cells, causing elevation of the steady-state levels of Mcl-1. This suggests that the unliganded form of Mcl-1 is sensitive to LASU1-mediated degradation of Mcl-1.

16126728|a|Transcription factor NF-kappaB plays a key regulatory role in the cellular response to pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF). In the absence of TNF, NF-kappaB is sequestered in the cytoplasm by inhibitory IkappaB proteins. Phosphorylation of IkappaBby the beta-catalytic subunit of IKK, a multicomponent IkappaB kinase, targets the inhibitor for proteolytic destruction and facilitates nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB. This pathway is initiated by TNF-dependent phosphorylation of T loop serines in IKKbeta, which greatly stimulates IkappaB kinase activity. Prior in vitro mixing experiments indicate that protein serine/threonine phosphatase 2A (PP2A) can dephosphorylate these T loop serines and inactivate IKK, suggesting a negative regulatory role for PP2A in IKK signaling. Here we provided several in vivo lines of evidence indicating that PP2A plays a positive rather than a negative role in the regulation of IKK. First, TNF-induced degradation of IkappaB is attenuated in cells treated with okadaic acid or fostriecin, two potent inhibitors of PP2A. Second, PP2A forms stable complexes with IKK in untransfected mammalian cells. This interaction is critically dependent on amino acid residues 121-179 of the IKKgamma regulatory subunit. Third, deletion of the PP2A-binding site in IKKgamma attenuates T loop phosphorylation and catalytic activation of IKKbeta in cells treated with TNF. Taken together, these data provide strong evidence that the formation of IKK.PP2A complexes is required for the proper induction of IkappaB kinase activity in vivo.

16239230|a|Protein serine/threonine phosphatase 2A (PP2A) regulates a wide variety of cellular signal transduction pathways. The predominant form of PP2A in cells is a heterotrimeric holoenzyme consisting of a scaffolding (A) subunit, a regulatory (B) subunit, and a catalytic (C) subunit. Although PP2A is known to regulate Raf1-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling at multiple steps in this pathway, the specific PP2A holoenzymes involved remain unclear. To address this question, we established tetracycline-inducible human embryonic kidney 293 cell lines for overexpression of FLAG-tagged Balpha/delta regulatory subunits by approximately 3-fold or knock-down of Balpha by greater than 70% compared with endogenous levels. The expression of functional epitope-tagged B subunits was confirmed by the detection of A and C subunits as well as phosphatase activity in FLAG immune complexes from extracts of cells overexpressing the FLAG-Balpha/delta subunit. Western analysis of the cell extracts using phosphospecific antibodies for MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 demonstrated that activation of these kinases in response to epidermal growth factor was markedly diminished in Balpha knock-down cells but elevated in Balpha- and Bdelta-overexpressing cells as compared with control cells. In parallel with the activation of MEK1/2 and ERK1/2, the inhibitory phosphorylation site of Raf1 (Ser-259) was dephosphorylated in cells overexpressing Balpha or Bdelta. Pharmacological inhibitor studies as well as reporter assays for ERK-dependent activation of the transcription factor Elk1 revealed that the PP2A holoenzymes ABalphaC and ABdeltaC act downstream of Ras and upstream of MEK1 to promote activation of this MAPK signaling cascade. Furthermore both PP2A holoenzymes were found to associate with Raf1 and catalyze dephosphorylation of inhibitory phospho-Ser-259. Together these findings indicate that PP2A ABalphaC and ABdeltaC holoenzymes function as positive regulators of Raf1-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling by targeting Raf1.

16087181|a|In deletion mutant analyses of potential phosphorylation sites in RLIP76, we identified T297 and S509 as targets for phosphorylation by PKCalpha. Phosphorylation at T297 increased doxorubicin (DOX)-transport activity approximately 2-fold for RLIP76 purified from recombinant source, or from three small (H69, H1417, H1618) and three non-small cell, one each derived from H226 (squamous), H358 (bronchio alveolar), and H1395 (adenocarcinoma) lung cancer cell lines. T297 phosphorylation conferred sensitivity to tryptic digestion at R293. The specific activity for DOX-transport by RLIP76 purified from non-small cell, which was primarily in the phosphorylated form, was approximately twice that in small cell lung cancer cell lines. These finding offer a novel explanation for the observed intrinsic differences in sensitivity to DOX between non-small cell and small cell lung cancer cell lines.

16278218|a|Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) monitors the structural integrity of intracellular proteins and its regulation is essential for the health and longevity of eukaryotic organisms. HSF1 also plays a role in the acute inflammatory response in the negative regulation of cytokine gene transcription. Here we show, for the first time, that HSF1 is regulated by the proinflammatory protein kinase MAPKAP kinase 2 (MK2). We have shown that MK2 directly phosphorylates HSF1 and inhibits activity by decreasing its ability to bind the heat shock elements (HSE) found in the promoters of target genes encoding the HSP molecular chaperones and cytokine genes. We show that activation of HSF1 to bind HSE in hsp promoters is inhibited through the phosphorylation of a specific residue, serine 121 by MK2. A potential mechanism for MK2-induced HSF1 inactivation is suggested by the findings that phosphorylation of serine 121 enhances HSF1 binding to HSP90, a major repressor of HSF1. Dephosphorylation of serine 121 in cells exposed to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs leads to HSP90 dissociation from HSF1, which then forms active DNA binding trimers. These experiments indicate a novel mechanism for the regulation of HSF1 by proinflammatory signaling and may permit HSF1 to respond rapidly to extracellular events, permitting optimal physiological regulation.

16280327|a|Bcl10 overexpression and nuclear translocation were originally identified in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma with t(1;14)(p32;q32) chromosome translocation. DNA amplification of Bcl10 was also found in other solid tumors. We have recently shown that nuclear translocation of Bcl10 is a specific molecular determinant of Helicobacter pylori-independent mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma (Kuo, S.-H., Chen, L. T., Yeh, K.-H., Wu, M. S., Hsu, H. C., Yeh, P. Y., Mao, T. L., Chen, C. L., Doong, S. L., Lin, J. T., and Cheng, A.-L. (2004) J. Clin. Oncol. 22, 3491-3497). However, the molecular mechanism of Bcl10 nuclear translocation remains unknown. In this study, we observed that tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) up-regulates the expression of Bcl10 and induces a fraction of Bcl10 nuclear translocation in human breast carcinoma MCF7 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that an NF-kappaB-binding site resides in the Bcl10 5 '-untranslated region. This study also demonstrates that Akt1, activated by TNFalpha, phosphorylates Bcl10 at Ser218 and Ser231 and that phosphorylated Bcl10 subsequently complexes with Bcl3 to enter the nucleus. Either inhibition of Akt1 or depletion of Bcl3 blocks Bcl10 nuclear translocation. In summary, these findings characterize a molecular linkage that directs Bcl10 nuclear translocation in response to TNFalpha treatment.

16266891|a|Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a congenital disease characterized by defective erythroid progenitor maturation. Patients' bone marrow progenitor cells do not respond to erythropoietic growth factors, such as erythropoietin. Mutations in the gene encoding for ribosomal protein (RP) S19 account for 25% of cases of DBA. The link between defective erythropoiesis and RPS19 is still unclear. Two not mutually exclusive hypotheses have been proposed: altered protein synthesis and loss of unknown extraribosomal functions.

16278681|a|p21-activated protein kinase 1 (Pak1) plays an important role in several cellular processes, including cytoskeleton reorganization, promotion of the cell survival, and the estrogen receptor (ER) signaling. Pak1 expression and activity is deregulated in a number of cancers. Pak1 is activated by a variety of physiological signals; however, less is known about the negative regulators of Pak1. Here, we report a negative regulator of Pak1. By performing a yeast two-hybrid screen of a mammary gland library, we identified cysteine-rich inhibitor of Pak1 (CRIPak) as a novel Pak1-interacting protein. We found that CRIPak is an intronless gene that localized to chromosome 4p16.3. It contains 13 zinc-finger domains and has three trypsin inhibitor-like, cysteine-rich domains and is widely expressed in a number of human cells and tissues. We further found that CRIPak interacted with Pak1 through the N-terminal regulatory domain and inhibited Pak1 kinase in both in vitro and in vivo assays. CRIPak inhibited Pak1-mediated LIM kinase activation and enhancement of ER transactivation. Conversely, selective inhibition of the endogenous CRIPak resulted in an increased Pak1 activity, and consequently, increased cytoskeleton remodeling and Pak1-mediated ER transactivation activity. The hormonal stimulation of cells enhanced CRIPak expression and promoted its colocalization with ER in the nuclear compartment. Our findings suggest that CRIPak is a novel negative regulator of the Pak1 and has a role in the modulation of Pak1-mediated ER transactivation in breast cancer cells.

16291755|a|Tpl2/Cot is a serine/threonine kinase that plays a key physiological role in the regulation of immune responses to pro-inflammatory stimuli, including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). TNF-alpha stimulates the JNK, ERK, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases and the NF-kappaB pathway by recruiting RIP1 and TRAF2 to the TNF receptor 1. Here we showed that Tpl2 activation by TNF-alpha signals depends on the integrity of the Tpl2-interacting proteins RIP1 and TRAF2, which are required for the engagement of the ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. However, neither RIP1 nor TRAF2 overexpression was sufficient to activate Tpl2 and ERK. We also showed that Tpl2 activation by TNF-alpha depends on a tyrosine kinase activity that is detected in TNF-alpha-stimulated cells. Based on both genetic and biochemical evidence, we concluded that in a variety of cell types, Syk is the tyrosine kinase that plays an important role in the activation of Tpl2 upstream of ERK. These data therefore dissect the TNF receptor 1 proximal events that regulate Tpl2 and ERK and highlight a role for RIP1, TRAF2, and Syk in this pathway.

16286470|a|The dual-specificity MAPK phosphatase MKP-1/CL100/DUSP1 is an inducible nuclear protein controlled by p44/42 MAPK (ERK1/2) in a negative feedback mechanism to inhibit kinase activity. Here, we report on the molecular basis for a novel positive feedback mechanism to sustain ERK activation by triggering MKP-1 proteolysis. Active ERK2 docking to the DEF motif (FXFP, residues 339-342) of N-terminally truncated MKP-1 in vitro initiated phosphorylation at the Ser(296)/Ser(323) domain, which was not affected by substituting Ala for Ser at Ser(359)/Ser(364). The DEF and Ser(296)/Ser(323) sites were essential for ubiquitin-mediated MKP-1 proteolysis stimulated by MKK1-ERK signaling in H293 cells, whereas the N-terminal domain and Ser(359)/Ser(364) sites were dispensable. ERK activation by serum increased the endogenous level of ubiquitinated phospho-Ser(296) MKP-1 and the degradation of MKP-1. Intriguingly, active ERK-promoted phospho-Ser(296) MKP-1 bound to SCF(Skp2) ubiquitin ligase in vivo and in vitro. Forced expression of Skp2 enhanced MKP-1 polyubiquitination and proteolysis upon ERK activation, whereas depletion of endogenous Skp2 suppressed such events. The kinetics of ERK signaling stimulated by serum correlated with the endogenous MKP-1 degradation rate in a Skp2-dependent manner. Thus, MKP-1 proteolysis can be achieved via ERK and SCF(Skp2) cooperation, thereby sustaining ERK activation.

16291744|a|The focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a key regulator of cell migration. Phosphorylation at Tyr-397 activates FAK and creates a binding site for Src family kinases. FAK phosphorylates the cytoskeletal protein alpha-actinin at Tyr-12. Here we report that protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP 1B) is an alpha-actinin phosphatase. PTP 1B-dependent dephosphorylation of alpha-actinin was seen in COS-7 cells and PTP 1B-null fibroblasts reconstituted with PTP 1B. Furthermore, we show that coexpression of wild-type alpha-actinin and PTP 1B causes dephosphorylation at Tyr-397 in FAK. No dephosphorylation was observed in cells coexpressing the alpha-actinin phosphorylation mutant Y12F and PTP 1B. Furthermore, the phosphorylation at four other sites in FAK was not altered by PTP 1B. In addition, we found that phosphorylated alpha-actinin bound to Src and reduced the binding of FAK to Src. The dephosphorylation at Tyr-397 in FAK triggered by wild-type alpha-actinin and PTP 1B caused a significant increase in cell migration. We propose that phosphorylated alpha-actinin disrupts the FAK x Src complex exposing Tyr-397 in FAK to PTP 1B. These findings uncover a novel feedback loop involving phosphorylated alpha-actinin and PTP 1B that regulates FAK x Src interaction and cell migration.

16282323|a|Bim, the Bcl-2 interacting mediator of cell death, is a member of the BH3-only family of pro-apoptotic proteins. Recent studies have demonstrated that the apoptotic activity of Bim can be regulated through a post-translational mechanism whereby ERK phosphorylation serves as a signal for Bim ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. In this report, we investigated the signaling pathways leading to Bim phosphorylation in Ba/F3 cells, an interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent B-cell line. IL-3 stimulation induced phosphorylation of Bim(EL), one of the predominant isoforms of Bim expressed in cells, at multiple sites, as evidenced by the formation of at least three to four bands by Western blotting that were sensitive to phosphatase digestion. The appearance of multiple, phosphorylated species of Bim(EL) correlated with Akt, and not ERK, activation. The PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, blocked IL-3-stimulated Akt activity and partially blocked Bim(EL) phosphorylation. In vitro kinase assays showed that recombinant Akt could directly phosphorylate a GST-Bim(EL) fusion protein and identified the Akt phosphorylation site in the Bim(EL) domain as Ser(87). Further, we demonstrated that cytokine stimulation promotes Bim(EL) binding to 14-3-3 proteins. Finally, we show that mutation of Ser(87) dramatically increases the apoptotic potency of Bim(EL). We propose that Ser(87) of Bim(EL) is an important regulatory site that is targeted by Akt to attenuate the pro-apoptotic function of Bim(EL), thereby promoting cell survival.

16275660|a|Proteins mediate their biological function through interactions with other proteins. Therefore, the systematic identification and characterization of protein-protein interactions have become a powerful proteomic strategy to understand protein function and comprehensive cellular regulatory networks. For the screening of valosin-containing protein, carboxyl terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP), and amphiphysin II interaction partners, we utilized a membrane-based array technology that allows the identification of human protein-protein interactions with crude bacterial cell extracts. Many novel interaction pairs such as valosin-containing protein/autocrine motility factor receptor, CHIP/caytaxin, or amphiphysin II/DLP4 were identified and subsequently confirmed by pull-down, two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation experiments. In addition, assays were performed to validate the interactions functionally. CHIP e.g. was found to efficiently polyubiquitinate caytaxin in vitro, suggesting that it might influence caytaxin degradation in vivo. Using peptide arrays, we also identified the binding motifs in the proteins DLP4, XRCC4, and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, which are crucial for the association with the Src homology 3 domain of amphiphysin II. Together these studies indicate that our human proteome array technology permits the identification of protein-protein interactions that are functionally involved in neurodegenerative disease processes, the degradation of protein substrates, and the transport of membrane vesicles.

16179162|a|Several families of kinases work together to ensure the rate and precision of mitosis. Aurora-B is an important serine/threonine kinase required for chromosome segregation and cytokinesis. Identification of Aurora-B substrates will help to enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanism of mitosis. Through a yeast two-hybrid screen, we found a novel partner of Aurora-B, Septin1, belonging to a conserved family of GTPase proteins that localize to the cleavage furrow and are involved in cytokinesis. We confirmed this interaction using Co-immunoprecipitation experiments in mammalian cells and GST-pull-down analysis in vitro. Moreover, Aurora-B can phosphorylate Septin1 in vitro. We identified that Ser248, Ser307, and Ser315 are the main phosphorylation sites in Septin1. These two proteins partially co-localize to the midbody during cytokinesis. So, it is possible that Septin1's role in the regulation of cytokinesis is related to its phosphorylation by Aurora-B. Unlike previous reports that Septins function in cytokinesis and localize to the cleavage furrow, we found that Septin1 localizes to the spindle pole throughout mitosis, indicating that Septin1 may function in chromosome segregation as well.

16286467|a|Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been demonstrated to act as second messengers in a number of signal transduction pathways, including NFkappaB. However, the mechanism(s) by which ROS regulate NFkappaB remain unclear and controversial. In the present report, we describe a mechanism whereby interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) stimulation of NFkappaB is partially regulated by H2O2-mediated activation of NIK and subsequent NIK-mediated phosphorylation of IKKalpha. IL-1beta induced H2O2 production in MCF-7 cells and clearance of this ROS through the expression of GPx-1 reduced NFkappaB transcriptional activation by inhibiting NIK-mediated phosphorylation of IKKalpha. Although IKKalpha and IKKbeta were both involved in IL-1beta-mediated activation of NFkappaB, only the IKKalpha-dependent component was modulated by changes in H2O2 levels. Interestingly, in vitro reconstitution experiments demonstrated that NIK was activated by a very narrow range of H2O2 (1-10 microM), whereas higher concentrations (100 microM to 1 mM) inhibited NIK activity. Treatment of cells with the general Ser/Thr phosphatase inhibitor (okadaic acid) lead to activation of NFkappaB and enhanced NIK activity as a IKKalpha kinase, suggesting that ROS may directly regulate NIK through the inhibition of phosphatases. Recruitment of NIK to TRAF6 following IL-1beta stimulation was inhibited by H2O2 clearance and Rac1 siRNA, suggesting that Rac-dependent NADPH oxidase may be a source of ROS required for NIK activation. In summary, our studies have demonstrated that redox regulation of NIK by H2O2 is mechanistically important in IL-1beta induction of NFkappaB activation.

15964553|a|Several protein kinases have been shown to be involved in spermatogenesis. Recently, a novel subfamily of serine/threonine kinases has been isolated whose expression is limited to testis. Here, we report the fifth family member, named TSSK5, which encodes a 328 amino acid protein. RT-PCR analysis showed that TSSK5 is exclusively expressed in human testis. We isolated cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB), a TSSK5 interacting protein via yeast two-hybrid system. The in vitro kinase assay showed that TSSK5 phosphorylated CREB at Ser-133. Using a CRE reporter system, we found that TSSK5 could stimulate the CREB/CRE responsive pathway in Hek293 cells. These results suggest that this kinase may be involved in spermatogenesis through phosphorylating CREB and then stimulating the CREB/CRE responsive pathway.

21399639|a|NF-κB is a major gene regulator in immune responses, and ribosomal protein S3 (RPS3) is an NF-κB subunit that directs specific gene transcription. However, it is unknown how nuclear translocation of RPS3 is regulated. Here we report that phosphorylation of RPS3 Ser209 by the kinase IKKβ was crucial for nuclear localization of RPS3 in response to activating stimuli. Moreover, virulence protein NleH1 of the foodborne pathogen Escherichia coli strain O157:H7 specifically inhibited phosphorylation of RPS3 Ser209 and blocked RPS3 function, thereby promoting bacterial colonization and diarrhea but resulting in less mortality in a gnotobiotic piglet-infection model. Thus, the IKKβ-dependent modification of a specific amino acid in RPS3 promoted specific NF-κB functions that underlie the molecular pathogenetic mechanisms of E. coli O157:H7.

21471201|a|DNA-damaging agents can induce premature senescence in cancer cells, which contributes to the static effects of cancer. However, senescent cancer cells may re-enter the cell cycle and lead to tumor relapse. Understanding the mechanisms that control the viability of senescent cells may be helpful in eliminating these cells before they can regrow. Treating human squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cells with the anti-cancer compounds, resveratrol and doxorubicin, triggered p53-independent premature senescence by invoking oxidative stress-mediated DNA damage. This process involved the mTOR-dependent phosphorylation of SIRT1 at serine 47, resulting in the inhibition of the deacetylase activity of SIRT1. SIRT1 phosphorylation caused concomitant increases in p65/RelA NF-κB acetylation and the expression of an anti-apoptotic Bfl-1/A1. SIRT1 physically interacts with the mTOR-Raptor complex, and a single amino acid substitution in the TOS (TOR signaling) motif in the SIRT1 prevented Ser-47 phosphorylation and Bfl-1/A1 induction. The pharmacologic and genetic inhibition of mTOR, unphosphorylatable S47A, or F474A TOS mutants restored SIRT1 deacetylase activity, blocked Bfl-1/A1 induction, and sensitized prematurely senescent SCC cells for apoptosis. We further show that the treatment of UVB-induced SCCs with doxorubicin transiently stabilized tumor growth but was followed by tumor regrowth upon drug removal in p53(+/-)/SKH-1 mice. The subsequent treatment of stabilized SCCs with rapamycin decreased tumor size and induced caspase-3 activation. These results demonstrate that the inhibition of SIRT1 by mTOR fosters survival of DNA damage-induced prematurely senescent SCC cells via Bfl-1/A1 in the absence of functional p53.

21487036|a|Cancer kinome sequencing studies have identified several protein kinases predicted to possess driver (i.e., causal) mutations. Using bioinformatic applications, we have pinpointed DAPK3 (ZIPK) as a novel cancer-associated kinase with functional mutations. Evaluation of nonsynonymous point mutations, discovered in DAPK3 in various tumors (T112M, D161N, and P216S), reveals that all three mutations decrease or abolish kinase activity. Furthermore, phenotypic assays indicate that the three mutations observed in cancer abrogate the function of the kinase to regulate both the cell cycle and cell survival. Coexpression of wild-type (WT) and cancer mutant kinases shows that the cancer mutants dominantly inhibit the function of the WT kinase. Reconstitution of a non-small cell lung cancer cell line that harbors an endogenous mutation in DAPK3 (P216S) with WT DAPK3 resulted in decreased cellular aggregation and increased sensitivity to chemotherapy. Our results suggest that DAPK3 is a tumor suppressor in which loss-of-function mutations promote increased cell survival, proliferation, cellular aggregation, and increased resistance to chemotherapy.

2153075|a|Some genital human papillomavirus (HPV) types, such as 16 and 18, are highly associated with malignant cervical tumors while others, such as HPV 6, are only rarely found in these malignancies. The E7 oncoproteins of HPV 6, 16 and 18 each have a 17 amino acid region with striking homology to adenovirus E1a and SV40 LT. E1a, LT and the E7 oncoprotein of HPV16 all bind the cellular Rb protein in vitro, and for E1a and LT this region of homology contains sequences essential for interaction with Rb. We have now found that in HPV 16 E7 this region (amino acids 21-37) contains two separate biochemical activities, each of which contributes to E7-mediated transformation. Rb binding was localized to the N terminus of this region, while the C terminus was shown to serve as a substrate for casein kinase (CK) II, which phosphorylated serine-31 and serine-32. Replacement of the two serines by non-phosphorylatable amino acids led to a reduction in transforming activity and abolished phosphorylation but did not affect Rb binding. Rb binding and CK II phosphorylation were also examined for the E7 proteins of HPV 6 and HPV 18. HPV 16 and 18 E7 bound similar amounts of Rb, but HPV 6 E7 consistently bound less. Phosphorylation rates also varied, with HPV 18 E7 being 2-fold faster than HPV 16 E7, which in turn was 2-fold faster than HPV 6 E7. We conclude that Rb binding and phosphorylation of E7 by CKII are independent activities which are required for efficient transformation by E7 and that these activities correlate directly with the relative oncogenic potential of these viruses.

21407176|a|Fidelity of chromosome segregation is ensured by a tension-dependent error correction system that prevents stabilization of incorrect chromosome-microtubule attachments. Unattached or incorrectly attached chromosomes also activate the spindle assembly checkpoint, thus delaying mitotic exit until all chromosomes are bioriented. The Aurora B kinase is widely recognized as a component of error correction. Conversely, its role in the checkpoint is controversial. Here, we report an analysis of the role of Aurora B in the spindle checkpoint under conditions believed to uncouple the effects of Aurora B inhibition on the checkpoint from those on error correction. Partial inhibition of several checkpoint and kinetochore components, including Mps1 and Ndc80, strongly synergizes with inhibition of Aurora B activity and dramatically affects the ability of cells to arrest in mitosis in the presence of spindle poisons. Thus, Aurora B might contribute to spindle checkpoint signalling independently of error correction. Our results support a model in which Aurora B is at the apex of a signalling pyramid whose sensory apparatus promotes the concomitant activation of error correction and checkpoint signalling pathways.

21482799|a|Functional diversity of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) enzymes mainly results from their association with distinct regulatory subunits. To analyze the functions of one such holoenzyme in vivo, we generated mice lacking PR61/B'δ (B56δ), a subunit highly expressed in neural tissues. In PR61/B'δ-null mice the microtubule-associated protein tau becomes progressively phosphorylated at pathological epitopes in restricted brain areas, with marked immunoreactivity for the misfolded MC1-conformation but without neurofibrillary tangle formation. Behavioral tests indicated impaired sensorimotor but normal cognitive functions. These phenotypical characteristics were further underscored in PR61/B'δ-null mice mildly overexpressing human tau. PR61/B'δ-containing PP2A (PP2A(T61δ)) poorly dephosphorylates tau in vitro, arguing against a direct dephosphorylation defect. Rather, the activity of glycogen synthase kinase-3β, a major tau kinase, was found increased, with decreased phosphorylation of Ser-9, a putative cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) target. Accordingly, CDK5 activity is decreased, and its cellular activator p35, strikingly absent in the affected brain areas. As opposed to tau, p35 is an excellent PP2A(T61δ) substrate. Our data imply a nonredundant function for PR61/B'δ in phospho-tau homeostasis via an unexpected spatially restricted mechanism preventing p35 hyperphosphorylation and its subsequent degradation.

21481189|a|The Dnmt3a DNA methyltransferase is responsible for establishing DNA methylation patterns during mammalian development. We show here that the mouse Dnmt3a DNA methyltransferase is able to transfer the methyl group from S-adenosyl-l-methionine (AdoMet) to a cysteine residue in its catalytic center. This reaction is irreversible and relatively slow. The yield of auto-methylation is increased by addition of Dnmt3L, which functions as a stimulator of Dnmt3a and enhances its AdoMet binding. Auto-methylation was observed in binary Dnmt3a AdoMet complexes. In the presence of CpG containing dsDNA, which is the natural substrate for Dnmt3a, the transfer of the methyl group from AdoMet to the flipped target base was preferred and auto-methylation was not detected. Therefore, this reaction might constitute a regulatory mechanism which could inactivate unused DNA methyltransferases in the cell, or it could simply be an aberrant side reaction caused by the high methyl group transfer potential of AdoMet.

21418524|a|The Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain serine/threonine kinase PASKIN, or PAS kinase, links energy flux and protein synthesis in yeast, regulates glycogen synthesis and protein translation in mammals, and might be involved in insulin regulation in the pancreas. According to the current model, binding of a putative ligand to the PAS domain disinhibits the kinase domain, leading to PASKIN autophosphorylation and increased kinase activity. To date, only synthetic but no endogenous PASKIN ligands have been reported. In the present study, we identified a number of novel PASKIN kinase targets, including ribosomal protein S6. Together with our previous identification of eukaryotic elongation factor 1A1, this suggests a role for PASKIN in the regulation of mammalian protein translation. When searching for endogenous PASKIN ligands, we found that various phospholipids can bind PASKIN and stimulate its autophosphorylation. Interestingly, the strongest binding and autophosphorylation was achieved with monophosphorylated phosphatidylinositols. However, stimulated PASKIN autophosphorylation did not correlate with ribosomal protein S6 and eukaryotic elongation factor 1A1 target phosphorylation. Although autophosphorylation was enhanced by monophosphorylated phosphatidylinositols, di- and tri-phosphorylated phosphatidylinositols inhibited autophosphorylation. By contrast, target phosphorylation was always inhibited, with the highest efficiency for di- and tri-phosphorylated phosphatidylinositols. Because phosphatidylinositol monophosphates were found to interact with the kinase rather than with the PAS domain, these data suggest a multiligand regulation of PASKIN activity, including a still unknown PAS domain binding/activating ligand and kinase domain binding modulatory phosphatidylinositol phosphates.

25501810|a|Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are associated with Parkinson’s disease, but the precise physiological function of the protein remains ill-defined. Recently, our group proposed a model in which LRRK2 kinase activity is part of an EndoA phosphorylation cycle that facilitates efficient vesicle formation at synapses in the Drosophila melanogaster neuromuscular junctions.Flies harbor only one Lrrk gene, which might encompass the functions of both mammalian LRRK1 and LRRK2. We therefore studied the role of LRRK2 in mammalian synaptic function and provide evidence that knockout or pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 results in defects in synaptic vesicle endocytosis, altered synaptic morphology and impairments in neurotransmission. In addition, our data indicate that mammalian endophilin A1 (EndoA1,also known as SH3GL2) is phosphorylated by LRRK2 in vitro at T73 and S75, two residues in the BAR domain. Hence, our results indicate that LRRK2 kinase activity has an important role in the regulation of clathrin-mediated endocytosis of synaptic vesicles and subsequent neurotransmission at the synapse.

21725354|a|Death-associated protein kinase (DAPk), a multi-domain serine/threonine kinase, regulates numerous cell death mechanisms and harbors tumor suppressor functions. In this study, we report that DAPk directly binds and functionally activates pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2), a key glycolytic enzyme, which contributes to the regulation of cancer cell metabolism. PKM2 was identified as a novel binding partner of DAPk by a yeast two-hybrid screen. This interaction was validated in vitro by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using purified proteins and in vivo by co-immunoprecipitation of the two endogenous proteins from cells. In vitro interaction with full-length DAPk resulted in a significant increase in the activity of PKM2. Conversely, a fragment of DAPk harboring only the functional kinase domain (KD) could neither bind PKM2 in cells nor activate it in vitro. Indeed, DAPk failed to phosphorylate PKM2. Notably, transfection of cells, with a truncated DAPk lacking the KD, elevated endogenous PKM2 activity, suggesting that PKM2 activation by DAPk occurs independently of its kinase activity. DAPk-transfected cells displayed changes in glycolytic activity, as reflected by elevated lactate production, whereas glucose uptake remained unaltered. A mild reduction in cell proliferation was detected as well in these transfected cells. Altogether, this work identifies a new role for DAPk as a metabolic regulator, suggesting the concept of direct interactions between a tumor suppressor and a key glycolytic enzyme to limit cell growth. Moreover, the work documents a unique function of DAPk that is independent of its catalytic activity and a novel mechanism to activate PKM2 by protein-protein interaction.

21516123|a|Mammalian Ste20-like kinase-1 (MST1) kinase mediates H₂O₂-induced cell death by anticancer drugs such as cisplatin in a p53-dependent manner. However, the mechanism underlying MST1 activation by H₂O₂ remains unknown. Here we show that peroxiredoxin-I (PRX-I) is an essential intermediate in H₂O₂-induced MST1 activation and cisplatin-induced cell death through p53. Cell stimulation with H₂O₂ resulted in PRX-I oxidation to form homo-oligomers and interaction with MST1, leading to MST1 autophosphorylation and augmentation of kinase activity. In addition, RNA interference knockdown experiments indicated that endogenous PRX-I is required for H₂O₂-induced MST1 activation. Live-cell imaging showed H₂O₂ generation by cisplatin treatment, which likewise caused PRX-I oligomer formation, MST1 activation and cell death. Cisplatin-induced PRX-I oligomer formation was not observed in embryonic fibroblasts obtained from p53-knockout mice, confirming the importance of p53. Indeed, ectopic expression of p53 induced PRX-I oligomer formation and cell death, both of which were cancelled by the antioxidant NAC. Moreover, we succeeded in reconstituting H₂O₂-induced MST1 activation in vitro, using purified PRX-I and MST1 proteins. Collectively, our results show a novel PRX-I function to cause cell death in response to high levels of oxidative stress by activating MST1, which underlies the p53-dependent cytotoxicity caused by anticancer agents.

21457715|a|Cell movement requires forces generated by non-muscle myosin II (NM II) for coordinated protrusion and retraction. The Cdc42/Rac effector MRCK regulates a specific actomyosin network in the lamella essential for cell protrusion and migration. Together with the Rho effector ROK required for cell rear retraction, they cooperatively regulate cell motility and tumour cell invasion. Despite the increasing importance of ROK inhibitors for both experimental and clinical purposes, there is a lack of specific inhibitors for other related kinases such as MRCK. Here, we report the identification of chelerythrine chloride as a specific MRCK inhibitor. Its ability to block cellular activity of MRCK resulted in the specific loss of NM II-associated MLC phosphorylation in the lamella, and the consequential suppression of cell migration.

21317875|a|Ire1 (Ern1) is an unusual transmembrane protein kinase essential for the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) unfolded protein response (UPR). Activation of Ire1 by association of its N-terminal ER luminal domains promotes autophosphorylation by its cytoplasmic kinase domain, leading to activation of the C-terminal ribonuclease domain, which splices Xbp1 mRNA generating an active Xbp1s transcriptional activator. We have determined the crystal structure of the cytoplasmic portion of dephosphorylated human Ire1α bound to ADP, revealing the 'phosphoryl-transfer' competent dimeric face-to-face complex, which precedes and is distinct from the back-to-back RNase 'active' conformation described for yeast Ire1. We show that the Xbp1-specific ribonuclease activity depends on autophosphorylation, and that ATP-competitive inhibitors staurosporin and sunitinib, which inhibit autophosphorylation in vitro, also inhibit Xbp1 splicing in vivo. Furthermore, we demonstrate that activated Ire1α is a competent protein kinase, able to phosphorylate a heterologous peptide substrate. These studies identify human Ire1α as a target for development of ATP-competitive inhibitors that will modulate the UPR in human cells, which has particular relevance for myeloma and other secretory malignancies.

21242974|a|Axin, a negative regulator of Wnt signaling, is a key scaffold protein for the β-catenin destruction complex. It has been previously shown that multiple post-translational modification enzymes regulate the level of Axin. Here, we provide evidence that protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) directly interacts with and methylates the 378th arginine residue of Axin both in vitro and in vivo. We found that the transient expression of PRMT1 led to an increased level of Axin and that knockdown of endogenous PRMT1 by short hairpin RNA reduced the level of Axin. These results suggest that methylation by PRMT1 enhanced the stability of Axin. Methylation of Axin by PRMT1 also seemingly enhanced the interaction between Axin and glycogen synthase kinase 3β, leading to decreased ubiquitination of Axin. Consistent with the role of PRMT1 in the regulation of Axin, knockdown of PRMT1 enhanced the level of cytoplasmic β-catenin as well as β-catenin-dependent transcription activity. In summary, we show that the methylation of Axin occurred in vivo and controlled the stability of Axin. Therefore, methylation of Axin by PRMT1 may serve as a finely tuned regulation mechanism for Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

21577200|a|Steroid receptor co-activator-3 (SRC-3/AIB1) is an oncogene that is amplified and overexpressed in many human cancers. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate 'activated SRC-3 oncoprotein' turnover during tumorigenesis remain to be elucidated. Here, we report that speckle-type POZ protein (SPOP), a cullin 3 (CUL3)-based ubiquitin ligase, is responsible for SRC-3 ubiquitination and proteolysis. SPOP interacts directly with an SRC-3 phospho-degron in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Casein kinase Iɛ phosphorylates the S102 in this degron and promotes SPOP-dependent turnover of SRC-3. Short hairpin RNA knockdown and overexpression experiments substantiated that the SPOP/CUL3/Rbx1 ubiquitin ligase complex promotes SRC-3 turnover. A systematic analysis of the SPOP genomic locus revealed that a high percentage of genomic loss or loss of heterozygosity occurs at this locus in breast cancers. Furthermore, we demonstrate that restoration of SPOP expression inhibited SRC-3-mediated oncogenic signaling and tumorigenesis, thus positioning SPOP as a tumor suppressor.

21423205|a|We performed a kinome-wide siRNA screen and identified 70 kinases altering cell migration in A549 lung cancer cells. In particular, ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (RSK1) silencing increased, whereas RSK2 and RSK4 downregulation inhibited cell motility. In a secondary collagen-based three-dimensional invasion screen, 38 of our hits cross-validated, including RSK1 and RSK4. In two further lung cancer cell lines, RSK1 but not RSK4 silencing showed identical modulation of cell motility. We therefore selected RSK1 for further investigation. Bioinformatic analysis followed by co-immunoprecipitation-based validation revealed that the actin regulators VASP and Mena interact with RSK1. Moreover, RSK1 phosphorylated VASP on T278, a site regulating its binding to actin. In addition, silencing of RSK1 enhanced the metastatic potential of these cells in vivo using a zebrafish model. Finally, we investigated the relevance of this finding in human lung cancer samples. In isogenically matched tissue, RSK1 was reduced in metastatic versus primary lung cancer lesions. Moreover, patients with RSK1-negative lung tumours showed increased number of metastases. Our results suggest that the findings of our high-throughput in vitro screen can reliably identify relevant clinical targets and as a proof of principle, RSK1 may provide a biomarker for metastasis in lung cancer patients.

21242975|a|Alterations in the levels of adhesion and motility of cells are critical events in the development of metastasis. Cyclin D1 (CycD1) is one of the most frequently amplified oncogenes in many types of cancers and it is also associated with the development of metastasis. Despite this, we still do not know which are all the relevant pathways by which CycD1 induces oncogenic processes. CycD1 functions can be either dependent or independent of the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk4, and they affect several cellular aspects such as proliferation, cell attachment and migration. In this work, we reveal a novel function of CycD1 that fosters our understanding of the oncogenic potential of CycD1. We show that CycD1 binds to the small GTPases Ral A and B, which are involved, through exocyst regulation, in the progression of metastatic cancers, inducing anchorage-independent growth and cell survival of transformed cells. We show that CycD1 binds active Ral complexes and the exocyst protein Sec6, and co-localizes with Ral GTPases in trans-Golgi and exocyst-rich regions. We have also observed that CycD1-Cdk4 phosphorylates the Ral GEF Rgl2 'in vitro' and that CycD1-Cdk4 activity stimulates accumulation of the Ral GTP active forms. In accordance with this, our data suggest that CycD1-Cdk4 enhances cell detachment and motility in collaboration with Ral GTPases. This new function may help explain the contribution of CycD1 to tumor spreading.

21423214|a|Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) couples ligand activation of cell surface cytokine receptors to the regulation of cellular functions including cell cycle progression, differentiation and apoptosis. It thereby coordinates biological programs such as development and hematopoiesis. Unscheduled activation of JAK2 by point mutations or chromosomal translocations can induce hyperproliferation and hematological malignancies. Typical signal transduction by the JAK2 tyrosine kinase comprises phosphorylation of STAT transcription factors. In this study, we describe the identification of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p27(Kip1) as a novel JAK2 substrate. JAK2 can directly bind and phosphorylate p27(Kip1). Both, the JAK2 FERM domain and its kinase domain bind to p27(Kip1). JAK2 phosphorylates tyrosine residue 88 (Y88) of p27(Kip1). We previously reported that Y88 phosphorylation of p27(Kip1) by oncogenic tyrosine kinases impairs p27(Kip1)-mediated CDK inhibition, and initiates its ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation. Consistently, we now find that active oncogenic JAK2V617F reduces p27(Kip1) stability and protein levels in patient-derived cell lines harboring the mutant JAK2V617F allele. Moreover, tyrosine phosphorylation of p27(Kip1) is impaired and p27(Kip1) expression is restored upon JAK2V617F inactivation by small hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown or by the pyridone-containing tetracycle JAK inhibitor-I, indicating that direct phosphorylation of p27(Kip1) can contribute to hyperproliferation of JAK2V617F-transformed cells. Activation of endogenous JAK2 by interleukin-3 (IL-3) induces Y88 phosphorylation of p27(Kip1), thus unveiling a novel link between cytokine signaling and cell cycle control in non-transformed cells. Oncogenic tyrosine kinases could use this novel pathway to promote hyperproliferation in tumor cells.

21460856|a|Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a family of heterotrimeric protein phosphatases that has a multitude of functions inside the cell, acting through various substrate targets in cell-signaling pathways. Recent evidence suggests that a subset of PP2A holoenzymes function as tumor suppressors and one particular family of B subunits, B56, are implicated in this function. However, the regulatory mechanisms that govern activation of B56-PP2A tumor-suppressive function have not been elucidated. In the present study, we demonstrate that ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) directly phosphorylates and specifically regulates B56γ3, B56γ2 and B56δ, after DNA damage. We further show that phosphorylation of B56γ3 at Ser510 leads to an increase in B56γ3-PP2A complexes, and direction of PP2A phosphatase activity toward the substrate p53, activating its tumor-suppressive functions. In addition, we found that under cell growth conditions B56γ3 is kept at low levels through the actions of the E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2, and, importantly, phosphorylation of B56γ3 by ATM leads to upregulation of the protein by blocking MDM2-mediated B56γ3 ubiquitination. Finally, we show that Ser510 phosphorylation significantly enhances the ability of B56γ3 to inhibit cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. These results provide mechanistic insight into the regulation of PP2A tumor-suppressive function, and suggest a model for parallel regulation of p53 and B56γ3.

21423209|a|Our previous studies demonstrated that selective overexpression of the Ron receptor tyrosine kinase in the murine mammary epithelium leads to mammary tumor formation. Biochemical analysis of mammary tumor lysates showed that Ron overexpression was associated with increases in β-catenin expression and tyrosine phosphorylation. β-Catenin has also been shown to be regulated through tyrosine phosphorylation by the receptor tyrosine kinases Met, Fer and Fyn. However, the molecular and physiological roles of β-catenin and β-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation downstream of Ron are not known. To investigate this association, we show that Ron and β-catenin are coordinately elevated in human breast cancers. Our data also demonstrate that activation of Ron, through ligand binding by hepatocyte growth factor-like protein (HGFL), induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of β-catenin, primarily on tyrosine residues Tyr 654 and Tyr 670. In addition, HGFL-mediated Ron activation induces both β-catenin nuclear localization and transcriptional activity, with Tyr 654 and Tyr 670 residues of β-catenin being critical for these processes. We also demonstrate that a knockdown of Ron in breast cancer cell lines leads to a loss of HGFL-induced β-catenin-dependent transcriptional activation and cell growth, which can be rescued by activation of canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Moreover, we show that HGFL-dependent Ron activation mediates upregulation of the β-catenin target genes cyclin D1 and c-myc, and that expression of these target genes in breast cancer cells is decreased following inhibition of Ron and/or β-catenin. Finally, we show that genetic ablation of β-catenin in Ron-expressing breast cancer cells decreases cellular proliferation in vitro, as well as mammary tumor growth and metastasis, following orthotopic transplantation into the mammary fat pad. Together, our data suggest that β-catenin is a crucial downstream regulator of Ron receptor activation and is an important mediator of mammary tumorigenesis.

21602891|a|Here, we report the identification and characterization of a novel tyrosine phosphorylation site in the carboxy-terminal Src Homology 3 (SH3) (SH3C) domain of the Crk adaptor protein. Y251 is located in the highly conserved RT loop structure of the SH3C, a region of Crk involved in the allosteric regulation of the Abl kinase. Exploiting kinase assays to show that Y251 is phosphorylated by Abl in vitro, we generated affinity-purified antisera against phosphorylated Y251 in Crk and showed that Abl induces phosphorylation at Y251 in vivo, and that the kinetics of phosphorylation at Y251 and the negative regulatory Y221 site in vitro are similar. Y251 on endogenous Crk was robustly phosphorylated in chronic myelogenous leukemia cell lines and in A431 and MDA-MB-468 cells stimulated with epidermal growth factor. Using streptavidin-biotin pull downs and unbiased high-throughput Src Homology 2 (SH2) profiling approaches, we found that a pY251 phosphopeptide binds specifically to a subset of SH2 domains, including Abl and Arg SH2, and that binding of pY251 to Abl SH2 induces transactivation of Abl 1b. Finally, the Y251F Crk mutant significantly abrogates Abl transactivation in vitro and in vivo. These studies point to a yet unrealized positive regulatory role resulting from tyrosine phosphorylation of Crk, and identify a novel mechanism by which an adaptor protein activates a non-receptor tyrosine kinase by SH2 domain displacement.

21317932|a|It has been suggested that adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and 12 AMPK-related kinases (ARK), including novel (nua) kinase family 1 (NUAK1), are activated by master kinase LKB1, a major tumor suppressor. Apart from evidence to suggest that NUAK1 participates in induction of tumor survival, invasion and p53-independent cellular senescence, its detailed biological functions remain unclear. Here we showed that in the presence of wild-type LKB1, NUAK1 directly interacts with and phosphorylates p53 in vitro and in vivo. The phosphorylation of p53 induced by LKB1 required the kinase activity of NUAK1 and phosphorylation of NUAK1 at Thr211 by LKB1 was essential for its kinase activity, which leads to the conclusion that LKB1 activates NUAK1 and regulates phosphorylation of p53 through the NUAK1 kinase, at least partially. LKB1/NUAK1 activation leads to cell cycle arrest at the G(1)/S border by inducing expression of p21/WAF1. Under the regulation of LKB1, NUAK1 interacts with p53 in the nucleus and binds to the p53-responsive element of p21/WAF1 promoter. These findings have highlighted a novel role for NUAK1 in LKB1-related signaling pathways; NUAK1 can regulate cell proliferation and exert tumor suppression through direct interaction with p53.

21423167|a|Inhibitor of κB (IκB) kinase (IKK) phosphorylates IκB proteins, leading to their degradation and the liberation of nuclear factor κB for gene transcription. Here we report the crystal structure of IKKβ in complex with an inhibitor, at a resolution of 3.6 Å. The structure reveals a trimodular architecture comprising the kinase domain, a ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) and an elongated, α-helical scaffold/dimerization domain (SDD). Unexpectedly, the predicted leucine zipper and helix-loop-helix motifs do not form these structures but are part of the SDD. The ULD and SDD mediate a critical interaction with IκBα that restricts substrate specificity, and the ULD is also required for catalytic activity. The SDD mediates IKKβ dimerization, but dimerization per se is not important for maintaining IKKβ activity and instead is required for IKKβ activation. Other IKK family members, IKKα, TBK1 and IKK-i, may have a similar trimodular architecture and function.

21331046|a|Toll-like receptors (TLRs) function as initiators of inflammation through their ability to sense pathogen-associated molecular patterns and products of tissue damage. Transcriptional activation of many TLR-responsive genes requires an initial de-repression step in which nuclear receptor co-repressor (NCoR) complexes are actively removed from the promoters of target genes to relieve basal repression. Ligand-dependent SUMOylation of liver X receptors (LXRs) has been found to suppress TLR4-induced transcription potently by preventing the NCoR clearance step, but the underlying mechanisms remain enigmatic. Here we provide evidence that coronin 2A (CORO2A), a component of the NCoR complex of previously unknown function, mediates TLR-induced NCoR turnover by a mechanism involving interaction with oligomeric nuclear actin. SUMOylated LXRs block NCoR turnover by binding to a conserved SUMO2/SUMO3-interaction motif in CORO2A and preventing actin recruitment. Intriguingly, the LXR transrepression pathway can itself be inactivated by inflammatory signals that induce calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIγ (CaMKIIγ)-dependent phosphorylation of LXRs, leading to their deSUMOylation by the SUMO protease SENP3 and release from CORO2A. These findings uncover a CORO2A-actin-dependent mechanism for the de-repression of inflammatory response genes that can be differentially regulated by phosphorylation and by nuclear receptor signalling pathways that control immunity and homeostasis.

21390126|a|B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma comprises biologically and clinically distinct diseases the pathogenesis of which is associated with genetic lesions affecting oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes. We report here that the two most common types--follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma--harbour frequent structural alterations inactivating CREBBP and, more rarely, EP300, two highly related histone and non-histone acetyltransferases (HATs) that act as transcriptional co-activators in multiple signalling pathways. Overall, about 39% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 41% of follicular lymphoma cases display genomic deletions and/or somatic mutations that remove or inactivate the HAT coding domain of these two genes. These lesions usually affect one allele, suggesting that reduction in HAT dosage is important for lymphomagenesis. We demonstrate specific defects in acetylation-mediated inactivation of the BCL6 oncoprotein and activation of the p53 tumour suppressor. These results identify CREBBP/EP300 mutations as a major pathogenetic mechanism shared by common forms of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, with direct implications for the use of drugs targeting acetylation/deacetylation mechanisms.

21245319|a|Numerous studies indicate that Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), a mammalian nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+))-dependent histone deacetylase (HDAC), plays a crucial role in p53-mediated stress responses by deacetylating p53. Nevertheless, the acetylation levels of p53 are dramatically increased upon DNA damage, and it is not well understood how the SIRT1-p53 interaction is regulated during the stress responses. Here, we identified Set7/9 as a unique regulator of SIRT1. SIRT1 interacts with Set7/9 both in vitro and in vivo. In response to DNA damage in human cells, the interaction between Set7/9 and SIRT1 is significantly enhanced and coincident with an increase in p53 acetylation levels. Importantly, the interaction of SIRT1 and p53 is strongly suppressed in the presence of Set7/9. Consequently, SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of p53 is abrogated by Set7/9, and p53-mediated transactivation is increased during the DNA damage response. Of note, whereas SIRT1 can be methylated at multiple sites within its N terminus by Set7/9, a methylation-defective mutant of SIRT1 still retains its ability to inhibit p53 activity. Taken together, our results reveal that Set7/9 is a critical regulator of the SIRT1-p53 interaction and suggest that Set7/9 can modulate p53 function indirectly in addition to acting through a methylation-dependent mechanism.

21441910|a|In metazoans, the Ras-Raf-MEK (mitogen-activated protein-kinase kinase)-ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) signalling pathway relays extracellular stimuli to elicit changes in cellular function and gene expression. Aberrant activation of this pathway through oncogenic mutations is responsible for a large proportion of human cancer. Kinase suppressor of Ras (KSR) functions as an essential scaffolding protein to coordinate the assembly of Raf-MEK-ERK complexes. Here we integrate structural and biochemical studies to understand how KSR promotes stimulatory Raf phosphorylation of MEK (refs 6, 7). We show, from the crystal structure of the kinase domain of human KSR2 (KSR2(KD)) in complex with rabbit MEK1, that interactions between KSR2(KD) and MEK1 are mediated by their respective activation segments and C-lobe αG helices. Analogous to BRAF (refs 8, 9), KSR2 self-associates through a side-to-side interface involving Arg 718, a residue identified in a genetic screen as a suppressor of Ras signalling. ATP is bound to the KSR2(KD) catalytic site, and we demonstrate KSR2 kinase activity towards MEK1 by in vitro assays and chemical genetics. In the KSR2(KD)-MEK1 complex, the activation segments of both kinases are mutually constrained, and KSR2 adopts an inactive conformation. BRAF allosterically stimulates the kinase activity of KSR2, which is dependent on formation of a side-to-side KSR2-BRAF heterodimer. Furthermore, KSR2-BRAF heterodimerization results in an increase of BRAF-induced MEK phosphorylation via the KSR2-mediated relay of a signal from BRAF to release the activation segment of MEK for phosphorylation. We propose that KSR interacts with a regulatory Raf molecule in cis to induce a conformational switch of MEK, facilitating MEK's phosphorylation by a separate catalytic Raf molecule in trans.

21383183|a|Maf1 protein is a global negative regulator of RNA polymerase (Pol) III transcription conserved from yeast to man. We report that phosphorylation of Maf1 by casein kinase II (CK2), a highly evolutionarily conserved eukaryotic kinase, is required for efficient Pol III transcription. Both recombinant human and yeast CK2 were able to phosphorylate purified human or yeast Maf1, indicating that Maf1 can be a direct substrate of CK2. Upon transfer of Saccharomyces cerevisiae from repressive to favorable growth conditions, CK2 activity is required for the release of Maf1 from Pol III bound to a tRNA gene and for subsequent activation of tRNA transcription. In a yeast strain lacking Maf1, CK2 inhibition showed no effect on tRNA synthesis, confirming that CK2 activates Pol III via Maf1. Additionally, CK2 was found to associate with tRNA genes, and this association is enhanced in absence of Maf1, especially under repressive conditions. These results corroborate the previously reported TFIIIB-CK2 interaction and indicate an important role of CK2-mediated Maf1 phosphorylation in triggering Pol III activation.

21602882|a|Homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) is an emerging player in cell response to genotoxic agents that senses damage intensity and contributes to the cell's choice between cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Phosphorylation of p53 at S46, an apoptosis-specific p53 posttranslational modification, is the most characterized HIPK2 function in response to lethal doses of ultraviolet (UV), ionizing radiation or different anticancer drugs, such as cisplatin, roscovitine and doxorubicin (DOX). Indeed, like p53, HIPK2 has been shown to contribute to the effectiveness of these treatments. Interestingly, p53-independent mechanisms of HIPK2-induced apoptosis were described for UV and tumor growth factor-β treatments; however, it is unknown whether these mechanisms are relevant for the responses to anticancer drugs. Because of the importance of the so-called 'p53-independent apoptosis and drug response' in human cancer chemotherapy, we asked whether p53-independent factor(s) might be involved in HIPK2-mediated chemosensitivity. Here, we show that HIPK2 depletion by RNA interference induces resistance to different anticancer drugs even in p53-null cells, suggesting the involvement of HIPK2 targets other than p53 in response to chemotherapy. In particular, we found that HIPK2 phosphorylates and promotes proteasomal degradation of ΔNp63α, a prosurvival ΔN isoform of the p53 family member, p63. Indeed, effective cell response to different genotoxic agents was shown to require phosphorylation-induced proteasomal degradation of ΔNp63α. In DOX-treated cells, we show that HIPK2 depletion interferes with ΔNp63α degradation, and expression of a HIPK2-resistant ΔNp63α-Δ390 mutant induces chemoresistance. We identify T397 as the ΔNp63α residue phosphorylated by HIPK2, and show that the non-phosphorylatable ΔNp63α-T397A mutant is not degraded in the face of either HIPK2 overexpression or DOX treatment. These results indicate ΔNp63α as a novel target of HIPK2 in response to genotoxic drugs.

21266548|a|Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a deadly human pathogen that evades innate immune responses by efficiently interfering with antiviral signaling pathways mediated by NF-κB, IRF3, and IFNα/β. These pathways rely on protein ubiquitination for their activation, and one outcome is the modification of proteins with the ubiquitin (Ub)-like modifier interferon-stimulated gene (ISG)15. CCHFV and related viruses encode a deubiquitinase (DUB) of the ovarian tumor (OTU) family, which unlike eukaryotic OTU DUBs also targets ISG15 modifications. Here we characterized the viral OTU domain of CCHFV (vOTU) biochemically and structurally, revealing that it hydrolyzes four out of six tested Ub linkages, but lacks activity against linear and K29-linked Ub chains. vOTU cleaved Ub and ISG15 with similar kinetics, and we were able to understand vOTU cross-reactivity at the molecular level from crystal structures of vOTU in complex with Ub and ISG15. An N-terminal extension in vOTU not present in eukaryotic OTU binds to the hydrophobic Ile44 patch of Ub, which results in a dramatically different Ub orientation compared to a eukaryotic OTU-Ub complex. The C-terminal Ub-like fold of ISG15 (ISG15-C) adopts an equivalent binding orientation. Interestingly, ISG15-C contains an additional second hydrophobic surface that is specifically contacted by vOTU. These subtle differences in Ub/ISG15 binding allowed the design of vOTU variants specific for either Ub or ISG15, which will be useful tools to understand the relative contribution of ubiquitination vs. ISGylation in viral infection. Furthermore, the crystal structures will allow structure-based design of antiviral agents targeting this enzyme.

17620057|a|The activity of Rb (retinoblastoma protein) is regulated by phosphorylation and acetylation events. Active Rb is hypophosphorylated and acetylated on multiple residues. Inactivation of Rb involves concerted hyper-phosphorylation by cyclin-CDK (cyclin-dependent kinase) complexes combined with deacetylation of appropriate lysine residues within Rb. In the present study, using in vivo co-immunoprecipitation experiments, we identified mammalian SIRT1 (sirtuin 1) as a binding partner for Rb and its family members p107 and p130. Formation of Rb-SIRT1 complexes required the pocket domain of Rb. p300 catalysed the acetylation of Rb, and SIRT1 was a potent deacetylase for Rb. The ability of SIRT1 to catalyse the deacetylation of Rb was dependent on NAD and was inhibited by the SIRT1 inhibitor nicotinamide. Deacetylated lysine residues within Rb formed a domain similar to the SIRT1-targeted domain of the p53 tumour suppressor protein. Cultures of arrested cells, via contact inhibition or DNA damage, exhibited decreased Rb phosphorylation and increased Rb acetylation. Overexpression of SIRT1 in either confluent or etoposide-treated cells resulted in a significant reduction in Rb acetylation, which was restored with nicotinamide. Gene knockdown of SIRT1 by siRNA (short interfering RNA) produced an accumulation of acetylated Rb. This increase was augmented further when siRNA against SIRT1 was used in conjunction with nicotinamide. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that SIRT1 is an in vitro and in vivo deacetylase for the Rb tumour suppressor protein.

17568776|a|Although the recently identified Pirh2 protein is known as a p53-induced ubiquitin-protein E3 ligase, which negatively regulates p53, the detailed mechanism underlying the regulation of Pirh2 remains largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that while Pirh2 is mostly detected in the phosphorylated form in normal tissues, it is predominantly present in the unphosphorylated form in majority of tumor cell lines and tissues examined. Phosphorylated Pirh2 is far more unstable than its unphosphorylated form. We further identified that Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMK II) phosphorylates Pirh2 on residues Thr-154 and Ser-155. Phosphorylation of Pirh2 appears to be regulated through cell cycle-dependent mechanism. CaMK II-mediated Pirh2 phosphorylation abrogates its E3 ligase activity toward p53. Together, our data suggest that phosphorylation of Pirh2 may act as a fine-tuning to maintain the balance of p53-Pirh2 autoregulatory feedback loop, which facilitates the tight regulation of p53 stability and tumor suppression.

17962809|a|Protein kinase D2 (PKD2), a member of the PKD family of serine/threonine kinases, is localized in various subcellular compartments including the nucleus where the kinase accumulates upon activation of G-protein-coupled receptors. We define three critical post-translational modifications required for nuclear accumulation of PKD2 in response to activation of the CCK2 receptor (CCK2R): phosphorylation at Ser706 and Ser710 within the activation loop by PKC eta leading to catalytic activity and phosphorylation at Ser244 within the zinc-finger domain, which is crucial for blocking nuclear export of active PKD2 by preventing its interaction with the Crm-1 export machinery. We identify CK1delta and epsilon as upstream activated kinases by CCK2R that phosphorylate PKD2 at Ser244. Moreover, nuclear accumulation of active PKD2 is a prerequisite for efficient phosphorylation of its nuclear substrate, HDAC7. Only nuclear, active PKD2 mediates CCK2R-induced HDAC7 phosphorylation and Nur77 expression. Thus, we define a novel, compartment-specific signal transduction pathway downstream of CCK2R that phosphorylates PKD2 at three specific sites, results in nuclear accumulation of the active kinase and culminates in efficient phosphorylation of nuclear PKD2 substrates in human gastric cancer cells.

17853892|a|The activity state of cofilin, which controls actin dynamics, is driven by a phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cycle. Phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM-kinases results in its inactivation, a process supported by 14-3-3zeta and reversed by dephosphorylation by slingshot phosphatases. Here we report on a novel cellular function for the phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cycle of cofilin. We demonstrate that muscarinic receptor-mediated stimulation of phospholipase D1 (PLD1) is controlled by LIM-kinase, slingshot phosphatase as well as 14-3-3zeta, and requires phosphorylatable cofilin. Cofilin directly and specifically interacts with PLD1 and upon phosphorylation by LIM-kinase1, stimulates PLD1 activity, an effect mimicked by phosphorylation-mimic cofilin mutants. The interaction of cofilin with PLD1 is under receptor control and encompasses a PLD1-specific fragment (aa 585-712). Expression of this fragment suppresses receptor-induced cofilin-PLD1 interaction as well as PLD stimulation and actin stress fiber formation. These data indicate that till now designated inactive phospho-cofilin exhibits an active cellular function, and suggest that phospho-cofilin by its stimulatory effect on PLD1 may control a large variety of cellular functions.

17681947|a|Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) first discovered as the constitutively active nucleophosmin-ALK oncoprotein in anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCL). Full-length ALK has a critical role in normal development and differentiation. Activated full-length ALK also is found in different malignant cancers. Nevertheless, the ligand to activate ALK remained unknown until recently, when ALK was proposed to be the physiological receptor of the cytokine pleiotrophin (PTN, Ptn). However, earlier studies had demonstrated that receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP) beta/zeta is a physiological PTN receptor. We now demonstrate that phosphorylation of ALK in PTN-stimulated cells is mediated through the PTN/RPTPbeta/zeta signaling pathway. ALK is phosphorylated independently of a direct interaction of PTN with ALK. The data thus support a unique model of ALK activation. In cells not stimulated by PTN, RPTPbeta/zeta dephosphorylates ALK at the site(s) in ALK that is undergoing autophosphorylation through autoactivation. In contrast, when RPTPbeta/zeta is inactivated in PTN-stimulated cells, the sites that are autophosphorylated in ALK no longer can be dephosphorylated by RPTPbeta/zeta; thus, autoactivation and tyrosine phosphorylation of ALK rapidly increase. The data indicate that the PTN/RPTPbeta/zeta signaling pathway is a critical regulator of the steady state levels of tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of ALK; the data support the conclusion that ALK phosphorylation and activation in PTN-stimulated cells are increased through a unique "alternative mechanism of RTK activation."

17586502|a|The juxtamembrane (JM) regions of several receptor tyrosine kinases are involved in autoinhibitory interactions that maintain the low basal activity of the receptors; mutations can give rise to constitutive kinase activity and signaling. In this report, we show that the JM region of the human insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF1R) plays a role in kinase regulation. We mutated JM residues that were conserved in this subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases, and expressed and purified the cytoplasmic domains using the Sf9/baculovirus system. We show that a kinase-proximal mutation (Y957F) and (to a lesser extent) a mutation in the central part of the JM region (N947A) increase the autophosphorylation activity of the kinase. Steady-state kinetic measurements show the mutations cause an increase in V(max) for phosphorylation of peptide substrates. When the holoreceptors were expressed in fibroblasts derived from IGF1R-deficient mice, the Y957F mutation led to a large increase in basal and in IGF1-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation. Together, these data demonstrate that the JM region of IGF1R plays an important role in limiting the basal activity of the receptor.

17603046|a|Protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta) is a Ser/Thr kinase which regulates numerous cellular processes, including proliferation, differentiation, migration and apoptosis. Here, we demonstrate that PKCdelta undergoes in vitro autophosphorylation at three sites within its V3 region (S299, S302, S304), each of which is unique to this PKC isoform and evolutionarily conserved. We demonstrate that S299 and S304 can be phosphorylated in mammalian cells following phorbol ester stimulation and that S299-phosphorylated PKCdelta is localised to both the plasma and nuclear membranes. These data indicate that PKCdelta is phosphorylated upon activation and that phospho-S299 represents a useful marker of the activated enzyme.

17606906|a|Src kinase mediates growth factor signaling and causes oncogenic transformation, which includes dramatic changes in the actin cytoskeleton, cell shape, and motility. Cortactin was discovered as a substrate for Src. How phosphorylation of cortactin can enhance actin assembly is unknown. Here, using an actin assembly system reconstituted from purified components, we demonstrate for the first time a biochemical mechanism by which Src phosphorylation of cortactin affects actin assembly. The adaptor Nck is an important component of the system, linking phosphorylated cortactin with neuronal WASp (N-WASp) and WASp-interacting protein (WIP) to activate Arp2/3 complex.

17805299|a|p53, the tumour suppressor and transcriptional activator, is regulated by numerous post-translational modifications, including lysine methylation. Histone lysine methylation has recently been shown to be reversible; however, it is not known whether non-histone proteins are substrates for demethylation. Here we show that, in human cells, the histone lysine-specific demethylase LSD1 (refs 3, 4) interacts with p53 to repress p53-mediated transcriptional activation and to inhibit the role of p53 in promoting apoptosis. We find that, in vitro, LSD1 removes both monomethylation (K370me1) and dimethylation (K370me2) at K370, a previously identified Smyd2-dependent monomethylation site. However, in vivo, LSD1 shows a strong preference to reverse K370me2, which is performed by a distinct, but unknown, methyltransferase. Our results indicate that K370me2 has a different role in regulating p53 from that of K370me1: K370me1 represses p53 function, whereas K370me2 promotes association with the coactivator 53BP1 (p53-binding protein 1) through tandem Tudor domains in 53BP1. Further, LSD1 represses p53 function through the inhibition of interaction of p53 with 53BP1. These observations show that p53 is dynamically regulated by lysine methylation and demethylation and that the methylation status at a single lysine residue confers distinct regulatory output. Lysine methylation therefore provides similar regulatory complexity for non-histone proteins and for histones.

17589501|a|Post-translational histone modification has a fundamental role in chromatin biology and is proposed to constitute a 'histone code' in epigenetic regulation. Differential methylation of histone H3 and H4 lysyl residues regulates processes including heterochromatin formation, X-chromosome inactivation, genome imprinting, DNA repair and transcriptional regulation. The discovery of lysyl demethylases using flavin (amine oxidases) or Fe(II) and 2-oxoglutarate as cofactors (2OG oxygenases) has changed the view of methylation as a stable epigenetic marker. However, little is known about how the demethylases are selective for particular lysyl-containing sequences in specific methylation states, a key to understanding their functions. Here we reveal how human JMJD2A (jumonji domain containing 2A), which is selective towards tri- and dimethylated histone H3 lysyl residues 9 and 36 (H3K9me3/me2 and H3K36me3/me2), discriminates between methylation states and achieves sequence selectivity for H3K9. We report structures of JMJD2A-Ni(II)-Zn(II) inhibitor complexes bound to tri-, di- and monomethyl forms of H3K9 and the trimethyl form of H3K36. The structures reveal a lysyl-binding pocket in which substrates are bound in distinct bent conformations involving the Zn-binding site. We propose a mechanism for achieving methylation state selectivity involving the orientation of the substrate methyl groups towards a ferryl intermediate. The results suggest distinct recognition mechanisms in different demethylase subfamilies and provide a starting point to develop chemical tools for drug discovery and to study and dissect the complexity of reversible histone methylation and its role in chromatin biology.

17805297|a|Self-renewal and differentiation are cardinal features of stem cells. Asymmetric cell division provides one fundamental mechanism by which stem cell self-renewal and differentiation are balanced. A failure of this balance could lead to diseases such as cancer. During asymmetric division of stem cells, factors controlling their self-renewal and differentiation are unequally segregated between daughter cells. Numb is one such factor that is segregated to the differentiating daughter cell during the stem-cell-like neuroblast divisions in Drosophila melanogaster, where it inhibits self-renewal. The localization and function of Numb is cell-cycle-dependent. Here we show that Polo (ref. 13), a key cell cycle regulator, the mammalian counterparts of which have been implicated as oncogenes as well as tumour suppressors, acts as a tumour suppressor in the larval brain. Supernumerary neuroblasts are produced at the expense of neurons in polo mutants. Polo directly phosphorylates Partner of Numb (Pon, ref. 16), an adaptor protein for Numb, and this phosphorylation event is important for Pon to localize Numb. In polo mutants, the asymmetric localization of Pon, Numb and atypical protein kinase C are disrupted, whereas other polarity markers are largely unaffected. Overexpression of Numb suppresses neuroblast overproliferation caused by polo mutations, suggesting that Numb has a major role in mediating this effect of Polo. Our results reveal a biochemical link between the cell cycle and the asymmetric protein localization machinery, and indicate that Polo can inhibit progenitor self-renewal by regulating the localization and function of Numb.

17589523|a|JMJD2A is a JmjC histone demethylase (HDM) that catalyzes the demethylation of di- and trimethylated Lys9 and Lys36 in histone H3 (H3K9me2/3 and H3K36me2/3). Here we present the crystal structures of the JMJD2A catalytic domain in complex with H3K9me3, H3K36me2 and H3K36me3 peptides. The structures reveal that histone substrates are recognized through a network of backbone hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions that deposit the trimethyllysine into the active site. The trimethylated epsilon-ammonium cation is coordinated within a methylammonium-binding pocket through carbon-oxygen (CH...O) hydrogen bonds that position one of the zeta-methyl groups adjacent to the Fe(II) center for hydroxylation and demethylation. Mutations of the residues comprising this pocket abrogate demethylation by JMJD2A, with the exception of an S288A substitution, which augments activity, particularly toward H3K9me2. We propose that this residue modulates the methylation-state specificities of JMJD2 enzymes and other trimethyllysine-specific JmjC HDMs.

17851529|a|The recent discovery of a large number of histone demethylases suggests a central role for these enzymes in regulating histone methylation dynamics. Histone H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) has been linked to polycomb-group-protein-mediated suppression of Hox genes and animal body patterning, X-chromosome inactivation and possibly maintenance of embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity. An imbalance of H3K27 methylation owing to overexpression of the methylase EZH2 has been implicated in metastatic prostate and aggressive breast cancers. Here we show that the JmjC-domain-containing related proteins UTX and JMJD3 catalyse demethylation of H3K27me3/2. UTX is enriched around the transcription start sites of many HOX genes in primary human fibroblasts, in which HOX genes are differentially expressed, but is selectively excluded from the HOX loci in ESCs, in which HOX genes are largely silent. Consistently, RNA interference inhibition of UTX led to increased H3K27me3 levels at some HOX gene promoters. Importantly, morpholino oligonucleotide inhibition of a zebrafish UTX homologue resulted in mis-regulation of hox genes and a striking posterior developmental defect, which was partially rescued by wild-type, but not by catalytically inactive, human UTX. Taken together, these findings identify a small family of H3K27 demethylases with important, evolutionarily conserved roles in H3K27 methylation regulation and in animal anterior-posterior development.

17713478|a|The trithorax and the polycomb group proteins are chromatin modifiers, which play a key role in the epigenetic regulation of development, differentiation and maintenance of cell fates. The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) mediates transcriptional repression by catalysing the di- and tri-methylation of Lys 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me2/me3). Owing to the essential role of the PRC2 complex in repressing a large number of genes involved in somatic processes, the H3K27me3 mark is associated with the unique epigenetic state of stem cells. The rapid decrease of the H3K27me3 mark during specific stages of embryogenesis and stem-cell differentiation indicates that histone demethylases specific for H3K27me3 may exist. Here we show that the human JmjC-domain-containing proteins UTX and JMJD3 demethylate tri-methylated Lys 27 on histone H3. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ectopic expression of JMJD3 leads to a strong decrease of H3K27me3 levels and causes delocalization of polycomb proteins in vivo. Consistent with the strong decrease in H3K27me3 levels associated with HOX genes during differentiation, we show that UTX directly binds to the HOXB1 locus and is required for its activation. Finally mutation of F18E9.5, a Caenorhabditis elegans JMJD3 orthologue, or inhibition of its expression, results in abnormal gonad development. Taken together, these results suggest that H3K27me3 demethylation regulated by UTX/JMJD3 proteins is essential for proper development. Moreover, the recent demonstration that UTX associates with the H3K4me3 histone methyltransferase MLL2 (ref. 8) supports a model in which the coordinated removal of repressive marks, polycomb group displacement, and deposition of activating marks are important for the stringent regulation of transcription during cellular differentiation.

17567753|a|The Jumonji C domain is a catalytic motif that mediates histone lysine demethylation. The Jumonji C-containing oxygenase JMJD2A specifically demethylates tri- and dimethylated lysine-9 and lysine-36 of histone 3 (H3K9/36 me3/2). Here we present structures of the JMJD2A catalytic core complexed with methylated H3K36 peptide substrates in the presence of Fe(II) and N-oxalylglycine. We found that the interaction between JMJD2A and peptides largely involves the main chains of the enzyme and the peptide. The peptide-binding specificity is primarily determined by the primary structure of the peptide, which explains the specificity of JMJD2A for methylated H3K9 and H3K36 instead of other methylated residues such as H3K27. The specificity for a particular methyl group, however, is affected by multiple factors, such as space and the electrostatic environment in the catalytic center of the enzyme. These results provide insights into the mechanisms and specificity of histone demethylation.

21633354|a|Chromosome structure is dynamically regulated during cell division, and this regulation is dependent, in part, on condensin. The localization of condensin at chromosome arms is crucial for chromosome partitioning during anaphase. Condensin is also enriched at kinetochores but its precise role and loading machinery remain unclear. Here we show that fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe) kinetochore proteins Pcs1 and Mde4--homologues of budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) monopolin subunits and known to prevent merotelic kinetochore orientation--act as a condensin 'recruiter' at kinetochores, and that condensin itself may act to clamp microtubule binding sites during metaphase. In addition to the regional recruitment factors, overall condensin association with chromatin is governed by the chromosomal passenger kinase Aurora B. Aurora-B-dependent phosphorylation of condensin promotes its association with histone H2A and H2A.Z, which we identify as conserved chromatin 'receptors' of condensin. Condensin phosphorylation and its deposition onto chromosome arms reach a peak during anaphase, when Aurora B kinase relocates from centromeres to the spindle midzone, where the separating chromosome arms are positioned. Our results elucidate the molecular basis for the spatiotemporal regulation of mitotic chromosome architecture, which is crucial for chromosome partitioning.

17960875|a|The chromosomal high-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins, composed of HMGA1a, HMGA1b and HMGA2, play important roles in the regulation of numerous processes in eukaryotic cells, such as transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, RNA processing, and chromatin remodeling. The biological activities of HMGA1 proteins are highly regulated by their post-translational modifications (PTMs), including acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. Recently, it was found that the homeodomain-interacting protein kinase-2 (HIPK2), a newly identified serine/threonine kinase, co-immunoprecipitated with, and phosphorylated, HMGA1 proteins. However, the sites and the biological significance of the phosphorylation have not been elucidated. Here, we found that HIPK2 phosphorylates HMGA1a at Ser-35, Thr-52, and Thr-77, and HMGA1b at Thr-41 and Thr-66. In addition, we demonstrated that cdc2, which is known to phosphorylate HMGA1 proteins, could induce the phosphorylation of HMGA1 proteins at the same Ser/Thr sites. The two kinases, however, exhibited different site preferences for the phosphorylation: The preference for HIPK2 phosphorylation followed the order of Thr-77 > Thr-52 > Ser-35, whereas the order for cdc2 phosphorylation was Thr-52 > Thr-77 > Ser-35. Moreover, we found that the HIPK2-phosphorylated HMGA1a reduced the binding affinity of HMGA1a to human germ line promoter, and the drop in binding affinity induced by HIPK2 phosphorylation was lower than that introduced by cdc2 phosphorylation, which is consistent with the notion that the second AT-hook in HMGA1a is more important for DNA binding than the third AT-hook.

17721511|a|We describe a chemical proteomics approach to profile the interaction of small molecules with hundreds of endogenously expressed protein kinases and purine-binding proteins. This subproteome is captured by immobilized nonselective kinase inhibitors (kinobeads), and the bound proteins are quantified in parallel by mass spectrometry using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ). By measuring the competition with the affinity matrix, we assess the binding of drugs to their targets in cell lysates and in cells. By mapping drug-induced changes in the phosphorylation state of the captured proteome, we also analyze signaling pathways downstream of target kinases. Quantitative profiling of the drugs imatinib (Gleevec), dasatinib (Sprycel) and bosutinib in K562 cells confirms known targets including ABL and SRC family kinases and identifies the receptor tyrosine kinase DDR1 and the oxidoreductase NQO2 as novel targets of imatinib. The data suggest that our approach is a valuable tool for drug discovery.

17936559|a|The tumor suppressor p53 is a transcription factor that responds to cellular stresses by initiating cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. One transcriptional target of p53 is Mdm2, an E3 ubiquitin ligase that interacts with p53 to promote its proteasomal degradation in a negative feedback regulatory loop. Here we show that the wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (Wip1), or PPM1D, downregulates p53 protein levels by stabilizing Mdm2 and facilitating its access to p53. Wip1 interacts with and dephosphorylates Mdm2 at serine 395, a site phosphorylated by the ATM kinase. Dephosphorylated Mdm2 has increased stability and affinity for p53, facilitating p53 ubiquitination and degradation. Thus, Wip1 acts as a gatekeeper in the Mdm2-p53 regulatory loop by stabilizing Mdm2 and promoting Mdm2-mediated proteolysis of p53.

21575178|a|Classical mammalian mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways consist of a cascade of three successive phosphorylation events resulting in the phosphorylation of a variety of substrates, including another class of protein kinases referred to as MAPK-activating protein kinases (MAPKAPKs). The MAPKAPKs MK2, MK3 and MK5 are closely related, but MK2 and MK3 are the major downstream targets of the p38MAPK pathway, while MK5 can be activated by the atypical MAPK ERK3 and ERK4, protein kinase A (PKA), and maybe p38MAPK. MK2, MK3, and MK5 can phosphorylate the common substrate small heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), a modification that regulates the role of HSP27 in actin polymerization. Both stress and cAMP elevating stimuli can cause F-actin remodeling, but whereas the in vivo role of p38MAPK-MK2 in stress-triggered HSP27 phosphorylation and actin reorganization is well established, it is not known whether MK2 is involved in cAMP/PKA-induced F-actin rearrangements. On the other hand, MK5 can phosphorylate HSP27 and cause cytoskeletal changes in a cAMP/PKA-dependent manner, but its role as HSP27 kinase in stress-induced F-actin remodeling is disputed. Therefore, we wanted to investigate the implication of MK2 and MK5 in stress- and PKA-induced HSP27 phosphorylation.

17657516|a|Individuals carrying a mutation in one of the three cerebral cavernous malformation genes (CCM1/KRIT1, CCM2, CCM3) cannot be clinically distinguished, raising the possibility that they act within common molecular pathways. In this study, we demonstrate that CCM3 (PDCD10) coprecipitates and colocalizes with CCM2. We also show that CCM3 directly binds to serine/threonine kinase 25 (STK25, YSK1, SOK1) and the phosphatase domain of Fas-associated phosphatase-1 (FAP-1, PTPN13, PTP-Bas, PTP-BL). CCM3 is phosphorylated by STK25 but not by its other Yeast-Two hybrid interactor STK24, whereas the C-terminal catalytic domain of FAP-1 dephosphorylates CCM3. Finally, our experiments reveal that STK25 forms a protein complex with CCM2. Thus, our data link two proteins of unknown function, CCM3 and STK25, with CCM2, which is part of signaling pathways essential for vascular development and CCM pathogenesis.

17666011|a|Arginine methylation of histone H3 and H4 plays important roles in transcriptional regulation in eukaryotes such as yeasts, fruitflies, nematode worms, fish and mammals; however, less is known in plants. In the present paper, we report the identification and characterization of two Arabidopsis thaliana protein arginine N-methyltransferases, AtPRMT1a and AtPRMT1b, which exhibit high homology with human PRMT1. Both AtPRMT1a and AtPRMT1b methylated histone H4, H2A, and myelin basic protein in vitro. Site-directed mutagenesis of the third arginine (R3) on the N-terminus of histone H4 to lysine (H4R3N) completely abolished the methylation of histone H4. When fused to GFP (green fluorescent protein), both methyltransferases localized to the cytoplasm as well as to the nucleus. Consistent with their subcellular distribution, GST (glutathione transferase) pull-down assays revealed an interaction between the two methyltransferases, suggesting that both proteins may act together in a functional unit. In addition, we demonstrated that AtFib2 (Arabidopsis thaliana fibrillarin 2), an RNA methyltransferase, is a potential substrate for AtPRMT1a and AtPRMT1b, and, furthermore, uncovered a direct interaction between the protein methyltransferase and the RNA methyltransferase. Taken together, our findings implicate AtPRMT1a and AtPRMT1b as H4-R3 protein arginine N-methyltransferases in Arabidopsis and may be involved in diverse biological processes inside and outside the nucleus.

21131967|a|Signaling via the methylation of lysine residues in proteins has been linked to diverse biological and disease processes, yet the catalytic activity and substrate specificity of many human protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs) are unknown. We screened over 40 candidate PKMTs and identified SETD6 as a methyltransferase that monomethylated chromatin-associated transcription factor NF-κB subunit RelA at Lys310 (RelAK310me1). SETD6-mediated methylation rendered RelA inert and attenuated RelA-driven transcriptional programs, including inflammatory responses in primary immune cells. RelAK310me1 was recognized by the ankryin repeat of the histone methyltransferase GLP, which under basal conditions promoted a repressed chromatin state at RelA target genes through GLP-mediated methylation of histone H3 Lys9 (H3K9). NF-κB-activation-linked phosphorylation of RelA at Ser311 by protein kinase C-ζ (PKC-ζ) blocked the binding of GLP to RelAK310me1 and relieved repression of the target gene. Our findings establish a previously uncharacterized mechanism by which chromatin signaling regulates inflammation programs.

21119616|a|As a critical target for cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor protein (pRb) controls early cell cycle progression. We report here a new type of regulation that influences Cdk recognition and phosphorylation of substrate proteins, mediated through the targeted methylation of a critical lysine residue in the Cdk substrate recognition site. In pRb, lysine (K) 810 represents the essential and conserved basic residue (SPXK) required for cyclin/Cdk recognition and phosphorylation. Methylation of K810 by the methyltransferase Set7/9 impedes binding of Cdk and thereby prevents subsequent phosphorylation of the associated serine (S) residue, retaining pRb in the hypophosphorylated growth-suppressing state. Methylation of K810 is under DNA damage control, and methylated K810 impacts on phosphorylation at sites throughout the pRb protein. Set7/9 is required for efficient cell cycle arrest, and significantly, a mutant derivative of pRb that cannot be methylated at K810 exhibits compromised cell cycle arrest. Thus, the regulation of phosphorylation by Cdks reflects the combined interplay with methylation events, and more generally the targeted methylation of a lysine residue within a Cdk-consensus site in pRb represents an important point of control in cell cycle progression.

21151042|a|The proapoptotic Bcl2 homology domain 3(BH3)-only protein Bim is controlled by stringent post-translational regulation, predominantly through alterations in phosphorylation status. To identify new kinases involved in its regulation, we carried out a yeast two-hybrid screen using a non-spliceable variant of the predominant isoform--Bim(EL)--as the bait and identified the regulatory subunit of cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase A--PRKAR1A--as an interacting partner. We also show that protein kinase A (PKA) is a Bim(EL) isoform-specific kinase that promotes its stabilization. Inhibition of PKA or mutation of the PKA phosphorylation site within Bim(EL) resulted in its accelerated proteasome-dependent degradation. These results might have implications for human diseases that are characterized by abnormally increased PKA activity, such as the Carney complex and dilated cardiomyopathy.

21157427|a|SRSF2 is a serine/arginine-rich protein belonging to the family of SR proteins that are crucial regulators of constitutive and alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Although it is well known that phosphorylation inside RS domain controls activity of SR proteins, other post-translational modifications regulating SRSF2 functions have not been described to date. In this study, we provide the first evidence that the acetyltransferase Tip60 acetylates SRSF2 on its lysine 52 residue inside the RNA recognition motif, and promotes its proteasomal degradation. We also demonstrate that the deacetylase HDAC6 counters this acetylation and acts as a positive regulator of SRSF2 protein level. In addition, we show that Tip60 downregulates SRSF2 phosphorylation by inhibiting the nuclear translocation of both SRPK1 and SRPK2 kinases. Finally, we demonstrate that this acetylation/phosphorylation signalling network controls SRSF2 accumulation as well as caspase-8 pre-mRNA splicing in response to cisplatin and determines whether cells undergo apoptosis or G(2)/M cell cycle arrest. Taken together, these results unravel lysine acetylation as a crucial post-translational modification regulating SRSF2 protein level and activity in response to genotoxic stress.

21217772|a|The immediate early transcription factor nuclear factor (IκBs) kappa B (NF-κB) is crucially involved in the regulation of numerous physiological or pathophysiological processes such as inflammation and tumourigenesis. Therefore, the control of NF-κB activity, which is mainly regulated by signal-induced degradation of cytoplasmic inhibitors of NF-κB (IκBs), is of high relevance. One known alternative pathway of NF-κB regulation is the stimulus-induced proteasomal degradation of RelB, a component of the NF-κB dimer. Here, we identified the serine/threonine protein kinase glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) as a critical signalling component leading to RelB degradation. In Jurkat leukaemic T cells as well as in primary human T cells, tetradecanoylphorbolacetate/ionomycin- and CD3/CD28-induced RelB degradation were impaired by a GSK-3β-specific pharmacological inhibitor, an ectopically expressed dominant-negative GSK-3β mutant and by small-interfering RNA-mediated silencing of GSK-3β expression. Furthermore, a physical interaction between RelB and GSK-3β was shown by co-immunoprecipitation, which was already notable in unstimulated cells. Most importantly, as demonstrated by in vitro kinase assays, human RelB is inducibly phosphorylated by GSK-3β, indicating a direct substrate-enzyme relationship. The serine residue 552 is a target of GSK-3β-mediated phosphorylation in vitro and in vivo. We conclude that GSK-3β is a crucial regulator of RelB degradation, stressing the relevant linkage between the NF-κB system and GSK-3β.

21173228|a|Postsynaptic scaffolding proteins ensure efficient neurotransmission by anchoring receptors and signaling molecules in synapse-specific subcellular domains. In turn, posttranslational modifications of scaffolding proteins contribute to synaptic plasticity by remodeling the postsynaptic apparatus. Though these mechanisms are operant in glutamatergic synapses, little is known about regulation of GABAergic synapses, which mediate inhibitory transmission in the CNS. Here, we focused on gephyrin, the main scaffolding protein of GABAergic synapses. We identify a unique phosphorylation site in gephyrin, Ser270, targeted by glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) to modulate GABAergic transmission. Abolishing Ser270 phosphorylation increased the density of gephyrin clusters and the frequency of miniature GABAergic postsynaptic currents in cultured hippocampal neurons. Enhanced, phosphorylation-dependent gephyrin clustering was also induced in vitro and in vivo with lithium chloride. Lithium is a GSK3β inhibitor used therapeutically as mood-stabilizing drug, which underscores the relevance of this posttranslational modification for synaptic plasticity. Conversely, we show that gephyrin availability for postsynaptic clustering is limited by Ca(2+)-dependent gephyrin cleavage by the cysteine protease calpain-1. Together, these findings identify gephyrin as synaptogenic molecule regulating GABAergic synaptic plasticity, likely contributing to the therapeutic action of lithium.

21148103|a|Cilia function as cell sensors in many organs, and their disorders are referred to as "ciliopathies." Although ciliary components and transport machinery have been well studied, regulatory mechanisms of ciliary formation and maintenance are poorly understood. Here we show that male germ cell-associated kinase (Mak) regulates retinal photoreceptor ciliary length and subcompartmentalization. Mak was localized both in the connecting cilia and outer-segment axonemes of photoreceptor cells. In the Mak-null retina, photoreceptors exhibit elongated cilia and progressive degeneration. We observed accumulation of intraflagellar transport 88 (IFT88) and IFT57, expansion of kinesin family member 3A (Kif3a), and acetylated α-tubulin signals in the Mak-null photoreceptor cilia. We found abnormal rhodopsin accumulation in the Mak-null photoreceptor cell bodies at postnatal day 14. In addition, overexpression of retinitis pigmentosa 1 (RP1), a microtubule-associated protein localized in outer-segment axonemes, induced ciliary elongation, and Mak coexpression rescued excessive ciliary elongation by RP1. The RP1 N-terminal portion induces ciliary elongation and increased intensity of acetylated α-tubulin labeling in the cells and is phosphorylated by Mak. These results suggest that Mak is essential for the regulation of ciliary length and is required for the long-term survival of photoreceptors.

21179498|a|The circadian clock underlies daily rhythms of diverse physiological processes, and alterations in clock function have been linked to numerous pathologies. To apply chemical biology methods to modulate and dissect the clock mechanism with new chemical probes, we performed a circadian screen of ∼120,000 uncharacterized compounds on human cells containing a circadian reporter. The analysis identified a small molecule that potently lengthens the circadian period in a dose-dependent manner. Subsequent analysis showed that the compound also lengthened the period in a variety of cells from different tissues including the mouse suprachiasmatic nucleus, the central clock controlling behavioral rhythms. Based on the prominent period lengthening effect, we named the compound longdaysin. Longdaysin was amenable for chemical modification to perform affinity chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry analysis to identify target proteins. Combined with siRNA-mediated gene knockdown, we identified the protein kinases CKIδ, CKIα, and ERK2 as targets of longdaysin responsible for the observed effect on circadian period. Although individual knockdown of CKIδ, CKIα, and ERK2 had small period effects, their combinatorial knockdown dramatically lengthened the period similar to longdaysin treatment. We characterized the role of CKIα in the clock mechanism and found that CKIα-mediated phosphorylation stimulated degradation of a clock protein PER1, similar to the function of CKIδ. Longdaysin treatment inhibited PER1 degradation, providing insight into the mechanism of longdaysin-dependent period lengthening. Using larval zebrafish, we further demonstrated that longdaysin drastically lengthened circadian period in vivo. Taken together, the chemical biology approach not only revealed CKIα as a clock regulatory kinase but also identified a multiple kinase network conferring robustness to the clock. Longdaysin provides novel possibilities in manipulating clock function due to its ability to simultaneously inhibit several key components of this conserved network across species.

21085121|a|Cysteine is the most intrinsically nucleophilic amino acid in proteins, where its reactivity is tuned to perform diverse biochemical functions. The absence of a consensus sequence that defines functional cysteines in proteins has hindered their discovery and characterization. Here we describe a proteomics method to profile quantitatively the intrinsic reactivity of cysteine residues en masse directly in native biological systems. Hyper-reactivity was a rare feature among cysteines and it was found to specify a wide range of activities, including nucleophilic and reductive catalysis and sites of oxidative modification. Hyper-reactive cysteines were identified in several proteins of uncharacterized function, including a residue conserved across eukaryotic phylogeny that we show is required for yeast viability and is involved in iron-sulphur protein biogenesis. We also demonstrate that quantitative reactivity profiling can form the basis for screening and functional assignment of cysteines in computationally designed proteins, where it discriminated catalytically active from inactive cysteine hydrolase designs.

21151116|a|The protein lysine methyltransferase SET7 regulates DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) activity in mammalian cells by promoting degradation of DNMT1 and thus allows epigenetic changes via DNA demethylation. Here we reveal an interplay between monomethylation of DNMT1 Lys142 by SET7 and phosphorylation of DNMT1 Ser143 by AKT1 kinase. These two modifications are mutually exclusive, and structural analysis suggests that Ser143 phosphorylation interferes with Lys142 monomethylation. AKT1 kinase colocalizes and directly interacts with DNMT1 and phosphorylates Ser143. Phosphorylated DNMT1 peaks during DNA synthesis, before DNMT1 methylation. Depletion of AKT1 or overexpression of dominant-negative AKT1 increases methylated DNMT1, resulting in a decrease in DNMT1 abundance. In mammalian cells, phosphorylated DNMT1 is more stable than methylated DNMT1. These results reveal cross-talk on DNMT1, through modifications mediated by AKT1 and SET7, that affects cellular DNMT1 levels.

21209336|a|The ubiquitin (Ub)-related modifier Urm1 functions as a sulfur carrier in tRNA thiolation by means of a mechanism that requires the formation of a thiocarboxylate at the C-terminal glycine residue of Urm1. However, whether Urm1 plays an additional role as a Ub-like protein modifier remains unclear. Here, we show that Urm1 is conjugated to lysine residues of target proteins and that oxidative stress enhances protein urmylation in both Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mammalian cells. Similar to ubiquitylation, urmylation involves a thioester intermediate and results in the formation of a covalent peptide bond between Urm1 and its substrates. In contrast to modification by canonical Ub-like modifiers, however, conjugation of Urm1 involves a C-terminal thiocarboxylate of the modifier. We have confirmed that the peroxiredoxin Ahp1 is such a substrate in S. cerevisiae and found that Urm1 targets a specific lysine residue of Ahp1 in vivo. In addition, we have identified several unique substrates in mammalian cells and show that Urm1 targets at least two pathways on oxidant treatment. First, Urm1 is appended to lysine residues of three components that function in its own pathway (i.e., MOCS3, ATPBD3, and CTU2). Second, Urm1 is conjugated to the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling factor cellular apoptosis susceptibility protein. Thus, Urm1 has a conserved dual role by integrating the functions of prokaryotic sulfur carriers with those of eukaryotic protein modifiers of the Ub family.

21048939|a|Mutations within the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are a common cause of familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease. The multidomain protein LRRK2 exhibits overall low GTPase and kinase activity in vitro.

21149568|a|Members of the formin family are important for actin filament nucleation and elongation. We have identified a novel striated muscle-specific splice variant of the formin FHOD3 that introduces a casein kinase 2 (CK2) phosphorylation site. The specific targeting of muscle FHOD3 to the myofibrils in cardiomyocytes is abolished in phosphomutants or by the inhibition of CK2. Phosphorylation of muscle FHOD3 also prevents its interaction with p62/sequestosome 1 and its recruitment to autophagosomes. Furthermore, we show that muscle FHOD3 efficiently promotes the polymerization of actin filaments in cardiomyocytes and that the down-regulation of its expression severely affects myofibril integrity. In murine and human cardiomyopathy, we observe reduced FHOD3 expression with a concomitant isoform switch and change of subcellular targeting. Collectively, our data suggest that a muscle-specific isoform of FHOD3 is required for the maintenance of the contractile structures in heart muscle and that its function is regulated by posttranslational modification.

9677430|a|Human CD2 is a 50-55-kDa cell surface receptor specifically expressed on the surface of T lymphocytes and NK cells. Stimulation of human peripheral blood T cells with mitogenic pairs of anti-CD2 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) is sufficient to induce interleukin-2 production and T cell proliferation in the absence of an antigen-specific signal through the T cell receptor. CD2 has been shown previously to associate physically with the Src family protein-tyrosine kinases p56(lck) and p59(fyn). We now report that stimulation of T cells with mitogenic pairs of anti-CD2 mAbs enhanced the association of the Fyn polypeptide with the CD2 complex, whereas stimulation with single anti-CD2 mAb had minimal effect. Using glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins, we found that CD2 bound to the Src homology (SH) 3 domain of Fyn. Interestingly, the CD2-Fyn association was negatively regulated by the Fyn SH2 domain; CD2 bound poorly to GST fusion proteins expressing both the SH2 and SH3 domains of Fyn. However, the inhibitory effect of the Fyn SH2 domain on binding of the Fyn SH3 domain to CD2 was relieved by peptides containing a phosphorylated YEEI sequence that bound directly to the Fyn SH2 domain. In addition, we found that the ability of the Fyn SH2 domain to precipitate tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins, including the CD3zeta chain, was enhanced after T cell stimulation with mitogenic pairs of CD2 mAbs. Finally, overexpression of a mutated Fyn molecule, in which the ability of the Fyn SH2 domain to bind phosphotyrosine-containing proteins was abrogated, inhibited CD2-induced transcriptional activation of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), suggesting a functional involvement of the Fyn SH2 domain in CD2-induced T cell signaling. We thus propose that stimulation through the CD2 receptor leads to the tyrosine phosphorylation of intracellular proteins, including CD3zeta itself, which in turn bind to the Fyn-SH2 domain, allowing the direct association of the Fyn SH3 domain with CD2 and the initiation of downstream signaling events.

9716598|a|SLP-76 and Cbl are complex adapter proteins that have the capacity to bind to smaller adapter proteins, such as Grb2, which subsequently binds the nucleotide exchange protein Sos in the transmission of intracellular signals. SLP-76, Cbl, Shc, and Grb2 have been implicated in immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) signaling, leading to activation of Ras. However, their mechanism of action has not been determined. To date, there have been no reports of SLP-76 involvement in FcgammaRI-receptor signaling and no data exist for an interaction between Cbl, Shc, and SLP-76 in vivo. We provide evidence that SLP-76, Cbl, and Shc are tyrosine phosphorylated on FcgammaRI-receptor stimulation and are associated with the adapter protein Grb2 in gamma-interferon-differentiated U937 cells (U937IF). The interactions between SLP-76 and Cbl and SLP-76 and Grb2 are present in resting U937IF cells. However, the interaction between SLP-76 and Grb2 becomes augmented twofold on FcgammaRI-receptor aggregation. Our results provide the first evidence for a phosphorylation-dependent interaction between SLP-76 and Shc, induced at least 10-fold on FcgammaRI receptor stimulation. Our data indicate that a significant portion of a multimolecular complex containing Cbl, SLP-76, Shc, and Grb2 is distinct from a trimolecular complex containing the Ras guanine nucleotide exchanger Sos, Shc, and Grb2. FcgammaRI-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of SLP-76, Cbl, Shc, and the highly induced SLP-76-Shc interaction provide the first evidence that SLP-76 and Cbl are involved in FcgammaRI signaling and suggest a functional significance for these interactions in FcgammaRI signal relay in the control of Ras in myeloid cells.

9788880|a|We have isolated the human genes encoding the Pyst1 (MKP-3) and Pyst2 (MKP-X) MAP kinase phosphatases. Both genes consist of three exons interrupted by two introns and lack an intron which is conserved in all the other members of this gene family characterised to date. This reinforces the conclusion that Pyst1 and Pyst2 are members of a distinct and structurally homologous subfamily of dual-specificity (Thr/Tyr) MAP kinase phosphatases. We find that Pyst2 mRNA is constitutively expressed in a wide variety of human cell lines including those derived from ovarian, bladder and breast cancers. While there is no evidence for inducible expression of Pyst2 mRNA in human skin fibroblasts in response to cellular stress, Pyst2 mRNA levels are moderately increased in response to serum stimulation. Pyst2 protein is predominantly cytosolic when expressed in COS-1 cells. In common with Pyst1, Pyst2 shows substrate selectivity for the classical p42 (ERK2) isoform of MAP kinase both in vitro and in vivo, displaying much reduced activity towards stress activated MAP kinase isoforms such as JNK-1 and p38/RK. Pyst2 binds p42 MAP kinase in vivo and both MAP kinase binding and substrate selectivity correlate with the ability of different recombinant MAP and SAP kinases to cause catalytic activation of the Pyst2 phosphatase in vitro.

9705354|a|Human prostatic acid phosphatase (PAcP) is a prostate epithelium-specific differentiation antigen. In prostate carcinomas, the cellular PAcP is decreased. We investigated its functional role in these cells. Several lines of evidence support the hypothesis that cellular PAcP functions as a neutral protein-tyrosine phosphatase and is involved in regulating prostate cell growth. In this study, we identify its in vivo substrate. Our results demonstrated that, in different human prostate cancer cell lines, the phosphotyrosine (Tyr(P)) level of a 185-kDa phosphoprotein (pp185) inversely correlates with the cellular activity of PAcP. On SDS-PAGE, this pp185 co-migrates with the c-ErbB-2 oncoprotein. Immunodepletion experiments revealed that c-ErbB-2 protein is the major pp185 in cells. Results from subclones of LNCaP cells indicated the lower the cellular PAcP activity, the higher the Tyr(P) levels of c-ErbB-2. This inverse correlation was further observed in PAcP cDNA-transfected cells. In clone 33 LNCaP cells, L-(+)-tartrate suppresses the cellular PAcP activity and causes an elevated Tyr(P) level of c-ErbB-2 protein. Epidermal growth factor stimulates the proliferation of LNCaP cells, which concurs with a decreased cellular PAcP activity as well as an increased Tyr(P) level of c-ErbB-2. Biochemically, PAcP dephosphorylates c-ErbB-2 at pH 7.0. The results thus suggest that cellular PAcP down-regulates prostate cell growth by dephosphorylating Tyr(P) on c-ErbB-2 oncoprotein in those cells.

9808624|a|MAP kinase (MAPK) cascades are composed of a MAPK, MAPK kinase (MAPKK), and a MAPKK kinase (MAPKKK). Despite the existence of numerous components and ample opportunities for crosstalk, most MAPKs are specifically and distinctly activated. We investigated the basis for specific activation of the JNK subgroup of MAPKs. The specificity of JNK activation is determined by the MAPKK JNKK1, which interacts with the MAPKKK MEKK1 and JNK through its amino-terminal extension. Inactive JNKK1 mutants can disrupt JNK activation by MEKK1 or tumor necrosis factor (TNF) in intact cells only if they contain an intact amino-terminal extension. Mutations in this region interfere with the ability of JNKK1 to respond to TNF but do not affect its activation by physical stressors. As JNK and MEKK1 compete for binding to JNKK1 and activation of JNKK1 prevents its binding to MEKK1, activation of this module is likely to occur through sequential MEKK1:JNKK1 and JNKK1:JNK interactions. These results underscore a role for the amino-terminal extension of MAPKKs in determination of response specificity.

21719704|a|A missense single-nucleotide polymorphism in the gene encoding the lymphoid-specific tyrosine phosphatase (Lyp) has been identified as a causal factor in a wide spectrum of autoimmune diseases. Interestingly, the autoimmune-predisposing variant of Lyp appears to represent a gain-of-function mutation, implicating Lyp as an attractive target for the development of effective strategies for the treatment of many autoimmune disorders. Unfortunately, the precise biological functions of Lyp in signaling cascades and cellular physiology are poorly understood. Identification and characterization of Lyp substrates will help define the chain of molecular events coupling Lyp dysfunction to diseases. In the current study, we identified consensus sequence motifs for Lyp substrate recognition using an "inverse alanine scanning" combinatorial library approach. The intrinsic sequence specificity data led to the discovery and characterization of SKAP-HOM, a cytosolic adaptor protein required for proper activation of the immune system, as a bona fide Lyp substrate. To determine the molecular basis for Lyp substrate recognition, we solved crystal structures of Lyp in complex with the consensus peptide as well as the phosphopeptide derived from SKAP-HOM. Together with the biochemical data, the structures define the molecular determinants for Lyp substrate specificity and provide a solid foundation upon which novel therapeutics targeting Lyp can be developed for multiple autoimmune diseases.

21602804|a|Therapies targeting estrogen receptor α (ERα, encoded by ESR1) have transformed the treatment of breast cancer. However, large numbers of women relapse, highlighting the need for the discovery of new regulatory targets modulating ERα pathways. An siRNA screen identified kinases whose silencing alters the estrogen response including those previously implicated in regulating ERα activity (such as mitogen-activated protein kinase and AKT). Among the most potent regulators was lemur tyrosine kinase-3 (LMTK3), for which a role has not previously been assigned. In contrast to other modulators of ERα activity, LMTK3 seems to have been subject to Darwinian positive selection, a noteworthy result given the unique susceptibility of humans to ERα+ breast cancer. LMTK3 acts by decreasing the activity of protein kinase C (PKC) and the phosphorylation of AKT (Ser473), thereby increasing binding of forkhead box O3 (FOXO3) to the ESR1 promoter. LMTK3 phosphorylated ERα, protecting it from proteasomal degradation in vitro. Silencing of LMTK3 reduced tumor volume in an orthotopic mouse model and abrogated proliferation of ERα+ but not ERα- cells, indicative of its role in ERα activity. In human cancers, LMTK3 abundance and intronic polymorphisms were significantly associated with disease-free and overall survival and predicted response to endocrine therapies. These findings yield insights into the natural history of breast cancer in humans and reveal LMTK3 as a new therapeutic target.

21665150|a|Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 6 (eIF6) controls translation by regulating 80S subunit formation. eIF6 is overexpressed in tumors. Here, we demonstrate that eIF6 inactivation delays tumorigenesis and reduces tumor growth in vivo. eIF6(+/-) mice resist to Myc-induced lymphomagenesis and have prolonged tumor-free survival and reduced tumor growth. eIF6(+/-) mice are also protected by p53 loss. Myc-driven lymphomas contain PKCβII and phosphorylated eIF6; eIF6 is phosphorylated by tumor-derived PKCβII, but not by the eIF4F activator mTORC1. Mutation of PKCβII phosphosite of eIF6 reduces tumor growth. Thus, eIF6 is a rate-limiting controller of initiation of translation, able to affect tumorigenesis and tumor growth. Modulation of eIF6 activity, independent from eIF4F complex, may lead to a therapeutical avenue in tumor therapy.

21555521|a|p21-activated kinase (PAK) 2, a member of the PAK family of serine/threonine protein kinases, plays an important role in physiological processes such as motility, survival, mitosis, and apoptosis. However, the role of PAK2 in resistance to chemotherapy is unclear. Here we report that PAK2 is highly expressed in human breast cancer cell lines and human breast invasive carcinoma tissue compared with a human non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cell line and adjacent normal breast tissue, respectively. Interestingly, we found that PAK2 can bind with caspase-7 and phosphorylate caspase-7 at the Ser-30, Thr-173, and Ser-239 sites. Functionally, the phosphorylation of caspase-7 decreases its activity, thereby inhibiting cellular apoptosis. Our data indicate that highly expressed PAK2 mediates chemotherapeutic resistance in human breast invasive ductal carcinoma by negatively regulating caspase-7 activity.

21575866|a|Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a tyrosine kinase that is constitutively activated in certain cancers, following gene alterations such as chromosomal translocation, amplification, or point mutation. Here, we identified CH5424802, a potent, selective, and orally available ALK inhibitor with a unique chemical scaffold, showing preferential antitumor activity against cancers with gene alterations of ALK, such as nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells expressing EML4-ALK fusion and anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL) cells expressing NPM-ALK fusion in vitro and in vivo. CH5424802 inhibited ALK L1196M, which corresponds to the gatekeeper mutation conferring common resistance to kinase inhibitors, and blocked EML4-ALK L1196M-driven cell growth. Our results support the potential for clinical evaluation of CH5424802 for the treatment of patients with ALK-driven tumors.

25117710|a|Oncoproteins and tumor suppressors antagonistically converge on critical nodes governing neoplastic growth, invasion, and metastasis. We discovered that phosphorylation of the ETS1 and ETS2 transcriptional oncoproteins at specific serine or threonine residues creates binding sites for the COP1 tumor suppressor protein, which is an ubiquitin ligase component, leading to their destruction. In the case of ETS1, however, phosphorylation of a neighboring tyrosine residue by Src family kinases disrupts COP1 binding, thereby stabilizing ETS1. Src-dependent accumulation of ETS1 in breast cancer cells promotes anchorage-independent growth in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. These findings expand the list of potential COP1 substrates to include proteins whose COP1-binding sites are subject to regulatory phosphorylation and provide insights into transformation by Src family kinases. 

25096571|a|Previous reports have suggested that human CD4(+) CD25(hi)FOXP3(+) T regulatory cells (Tregs) have functional plasticity and may differentiate into effector T cells under inflammation. The molecular mechanisms underlying these findings remain unclear. Here we identified the residue serine 422 of human FOXP3 as a phosphorylation site that regulates its function, which is not present in murine Foxp3. PIM1 kinase, which is highly expressed in human Tregs, was found to be able to interact with and to phosphorylate human FOXP3 at serine 422. T cell receptor (TCR) signaling inhibits PIM1 induction, whereas IL-6 promotes PIM1 expression in in vitro expanded human Tregs. PIM1 negatively regulates FOXP3 chromatin binding activity by specifically phosphorylating FOXP3 at Ser(422). Our data also suggest that phosphorylation of FOXP3 at the Ser(418) site could prevent FOXP3 phosphorylation at Ser(422) mediated by PIM1. Knockdown of PIM1 in in vitro expanded human Tregs promoted FOXP3-induced target gene expression, including CD25, CTLA4, and glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor receptor (GITR), or weakened FOXP3-suppressed IL-2 gene expression and enhanced the immunosuppressive activity of Tregs. Furthermore, PIM1-specific inhibitor boosted FOXP3 DNA binding activity in in vitro expanded primary Tregs and also enhanced their suppressive activity toward the proliferation of T effector cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that PIM1 could be a new potential therapeutic target in the prevention and treatment of human-specific autoimmune diseases because of its ability to modulate the immunosuppressive activity of human Tregs. 

24344202|a|Mitochondrial morphology is regulated by the balance between two counteracting mitochondrial processes of fusion and fission. There is significant evidence suggesting a stringent association between morphology and bioenergetics of mitochondria. Morphological alterations in mitochondria are linked to several pathological disorders, including cardiovascular diseases. The consequences of stress-induced acetylation of mitochondrial proteins on the organelle morphology remain largely unexplored. Here we report that OPA1, a mitochondrial fusion protein, was hyperacetylated in hearts under pathological stress and this posttranslational modification reduced the GTPase activity of the protein. The mitochondrial deacetylase SIRT3 was capable of deacetylating OPA1 and elevating its GTPase activity. Mass spectrometry and mutagenesis analyses indicated that in SIRT3-deficient cells OPA1 was acetylated at lysine 926 and 931 residues. Overexpression of a deacetylation-mimetic version of OPA1 recovered the mitochondrial functions of OPA1-null cells, thus demonstrating the functional significance of K926/931 acetylation in regulating OPA1 activity. Moreover, SIRT3-dependent activation of OPA1 contributed to the preservation of mitochondrial networking and protection of cardiomyocytes from doxorubicin-mediated cell death. In summary, these data indicated that SIRT3 promotes mitochondrial function not only by regulating activity of metabolic enzymes, as previously reported, but also by regulating mitochondrial dynamics by targeting OPA1. 

24255956|a|Our previous studies showed that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) inhibits signal transducer activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) activation. Since EGCG may be a promising lead compound for new anti-STAT1 drug design, 15 synthetic catechins, characterized by the (-)-gallocatechin-3-gallate stereochemistry, were studied in the human mammary MDA-MB-231 cell line to identify the minimal structural features that preserve the anti-STAT1 activity. We demonstrate that the presence of three hydroxyl groups of B ring and one hydroxyl group in D ring is essential to preserve their inhibitory action. Moreover, a possible molecular target of these compounds in the STAT1 pathway was investigated. Our results demonstrate a direct interaction between STAT1 protein and catechins displaying anti-STAT1 activity. In particular, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis and molecular modeling indicate the presence of two putative binding sites (a and b) with different affinity. Based on docking data, site-directed mutagenesis was performed, and interaction of the most active catechins with STAT1 was studied with SPR to test whether Gln518 on site a and His568 on site b could be important for the catechin-STAT1 interaction. Data indicate that site b has higher affinity for catechins than site a as the highest affinity constant disappears in the H568A-STAT1 mutant. Furthermore, Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) kinase assay data suggest that the contemporary presence in vitro of STAT1 and catechins inhibits JAK2-elicited STAT1 phosphorylation. The very tight catechin-STAT1 interaction prevents STAT1 phosphorylation and represents a novel, specific and efficient molecular mechanism for the inhibition of STAT1 activation.

24352239|a|Nucleosomes are decorated with numerous post-translational modifications capable of influencing many DNA processes. Here we describe a new class of histone modification, methylation of glutamine, occurring on yeast histone H2A at position 105 (Q105) and human H2A at Q104. We identify Nop1 as the methyltransferase in yeast and demonstrate that fibrillarin is the orthologue enzyme in human cells. Glutamine methylation of H2A is restricted to the nucleolus. Global analysis in yeast, using an H2AQ105me-specific antibody, shows that this modification is exclusively enriched over the 35S ribosomal DNA transcriptional unit. We show that the Q105 residue is part of the binding site for the histone chaperone FACT (facilitator of chromatin transcription) complex. Methylation of Q105 or its substitution to alanine disrupts binding to FACT in vitro. A yeast strain mutated at Q105 shows reduced histone incorporation and increased transcription at the ribosomal DNA locus. These features are phenocopied by mutations in FACT complex components. Together these data identify glutamine methylation of H2A as the first histone epigenetic mark dedicated to a specific RNA polymerase and define its function as a regulator of FACT interaction with nucleosomes. 

24291004|a|Glucocorticoid resistance is a major driver of therapeutic failure in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here, we identify the AKT1 kinase as a major negative regulator of the NR3C1 glucocorticoid receptor protein activity driving glucocorticoid resistance in T-ALL. Mechanistically, AKT1 impairs glucocorticoid-induced gene expression by direct phosphorylation of NR3C1 at position S134 and blocking glucocorticoid-induced NR3C1 translocation to the nucleus. Moreover, we demonstrate that loss of PTEN and consequent AKT1 activation can effectively block glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis and induce resistance to glucocorticoid therapy. Conversely, pharmacologic inhibition of AKT with MK2206 effectively restores glucocorticoid-induced NR3C1 translocation to the nucleus, increases the response of T-ALL cells to glucocorticoid therapy, and effectively reverses glucocorticoid resistance in vitro and in vivo.

25490155|a|The class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex I (PI3KC3-C1) that functions in early autophagy consists of the lipid kinase VPS34, the scaffolding protein VPS15, the tumor suppressor BECN1, and the autophagy-specific subunit ATG14. The structure of the ATG14-containing PI3KC3-C1 was determined by single-particle EM, revealing a V-shaped architecture. All of the ordered domains of VPS34, VPS15, and BECN1 were mapped by MBP tagging. The dynamics of the complex were defined using hydrogen-deuterium exchange, revealing a novel 20-residue ordered region C-terminal to the VPS34 C2 domain. VPS15 organizes the complex and serves as a bridge between VPS34 and the ATG14:BECN1 subcomplex. Dynamic transitions occur in which the lipid kinase domain is ejected from the complex and VPS15 pivots at the base of the V. The N-terminus of BECN1, the target for signaling inputs, resides near the pivot point. These observations provide a framework for understanding the allosteric regulation of lipid kinase activity. 

24351927|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a multidomain protein implicated in Parkinson disease (PD); however, the molecular mechanism and mode of action of this protein remain elusive. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), along with other kinases, has been suggested to be an upstream kinase regulating LRRK2 function. Using MS, we detected several sites phosphorylated by PKA, including phosphorylation sites within the Ras of complex proteins (ROC) GTPase domain as well as some previously described sites (S910 and S935). We systematically mapped those sites within LRRK2 and investigated their functional consequences. S1444 in the ROC domain was confirmed as a target for PKA phosphorylation using ROC single-domain constructs and through site-directed mutagenesis. Phosphorylation at S1444 is strikingly reduced in the major PD-related LRRK2 mutations R1441C/G/H, which are part of a consensus PKA recognition site ((1441)RASpS(1444)). Furthermore, our work establishes S1444 as a PKA-regulated 14-3-3 docking site. Experiments of direct binding to the three 14-3-3 isotypes gamma, theta, and zeta with phosphopeptides encompassing pS910, pS935, or pS1444 demonstrated the highest affinities to phospho-S1444. Strikingly, 14-3-3 binding to phospho-S1444 decreased LRRK2 kinase activity in vitro. Moreover, substitution of S1444 by alanine or by introducing the mutations R1441C/G/H, abrogating PKA phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding, resulted in increased LRRK2 kinase activity. In conclusion, these data clearly demonstrate that LRRK2 kinase activity is modulated by PKA-mediated binding of 14-3-3 to S1444 and suggest that 14-3-3 interaction with LRRK2 is hampered in R1441C/G/H-mediated PD pathogenesis. 

24113872|a|Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). The neuropathology of LRRK2-related PD is heterogeneous and can include aberrant tau phosphorylation or neurofibrillary tau pathology. Recently, LRRK2 has been shown to phosphorylate tau in vitro; however, the major epitopes phosphorylated by LRRK2 and the physiological or pathogenic consequences of these modifications in vivo are unknown. Using mass spectrometry, we identified multiple sites on recombinant tau that are phosphorylated by LRRK2 in vitro, including pT149 and pT153, which are phospho-epitopes that to date have been largely unexplored. Importantly, we demonstrate that expression of transgenic LRRK2 in a mouse model of tauopathy increased the aggregation of insoluble tau and its phosphorylation at T149, T153, T205, and S199/S202/T205 epitopes. These findings indicate that tau can be a LRRK2 substrate and that this interaction can enhance salient features of human disease.

25503564|a|An intercentrosomal linker keeps a cell's two centrosomes joined together until it is dissolved at the onset of mitosis. A second connection keeps daughter centrioles engaged to their mothers until they lose their orthogonal arrangement at the end of mitosis. Centriole disengagement is required to license centrioles for duplication. We show that the intercentrosomal linker protein Cep68 is degraded in prometaphase through the SCF(βTrCP) (Skp1-Cul1-F-box protein) ubiquitin ligase complex. Cep68 degradation is initiated by PLK1 phosphorylation of Cep68 on Ser 332, allowing recognition by βTrCP. We also found that Cep68 forms a complex with Cep215 (also known as Cdk5Rap2) and PCNT (also known as pericentrin), two PCM (pericentriolar material) proteins involved in centriole engagement. Cep68 and PCNT bind to different pools of Cep215. We propose that Cep68 degradation allows Cep215 removal from the peripheral PCM preventing centriole separation following disengagement, whereas PCNT cleavage mediates Cep215 removal from the core of the PCM to inhibit centriole disengagement and duplication. 

24218572|a|Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) regulate a variety of fundamental cellular processes. CDK10 stands out as one of the last orphan CDKs for which no activating cyclin has been identified and no kinase activity revealed. Previous work has shown that CDK10 silencing increases ETS2 (v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2)-driven activation of the MAPK pathway, which confers tamoxifen resistance to breast cancer cells. The precise mechanisms by which CDK10 modulates ETS2 activity, and more generally the functions of CDK10, remain elusive. Here we demonstrate that CDK10 is a cyclin-dependent kinase by identifying cyclin M as an activating cyclin. Cyclin M, an orphan cyclin, is the product of FAM58A, whose mutations cause STAR syndrome, a human developmental anomaly whose features include toe syndactyly, telecanthus, and anogenital and renal malformations. We show that STAR syndrome-associated cyclin M mutants are unable to interact with CDK10. Cyclin M silencing phenocopies CDK10 silencing in increasing c-Raf and in conferring tamoxifen resistance to breast cancer cells. CDK10/cyclin M phosphorylates ETS2 in vitro, and in cells it positively controls ETS2 degradation by the proteasome. ETS2 protein levels are increased in cells derived from a STAR patient, and this increase is attributable to decreased cyclin M levels. Altogether, our results reveal an additional regulatory mechanism for ETS2, which plays key roles in cancer and development. They also shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying STAR syndrome. 

24165324|a|Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been identified as the causal molecule for autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). Experimental evidence indicates that LRRK2 may play an important role in the pathology induced by abnormal phosphorylation of tau. In the present study, we demonstrated that LRRK2 directly associates with GSK-3β, and that this interaction enhances the kinase activity of GSK-3β. Furthermore, we found that LRRK2-mediated activation of GSK-3β induces high phosphorylation of tau at Ser396 in SH-SY5Y cells. From our present findings, we conclude that LRRK2 may function as a novel enhancer for GSK-3β and as a physiological regulator of neurite outgrowth and axonal transport through regulation of the GSK-3β-mediated phosphorylation of tau at the cellular level. Since LRRK2 is detected in tau-positive inclusions in brain tissue affected by various neurodegenerative disorders, including PD, LRRK2-stimulated phosphorylation of tau by GSK-3β may be involved in development of pathological features in the initial stage of PD.

24360279|a|Distal enhancers characterized by the H3K4me(1) mark play critical roles in developmental and transcriptional programs. However, potential roles of specific distal regulatory elements in regulating RNA polymerase II (Pol II) promoter-proximal pause release remain poorly investigated. Here, we report that a unique cohort of jumonji C-domain-containing protein 6 (JMJD6) and bromodomain-containing protein 4 (Brd4) cobound distal enhancers, termed anti-pause enhancers (A-PEs), regulate promoter-proximal pause release of a large subset of transcription units via long-range interactions. Brd4-dependent JMJD6 recruitment on A-PEs mediates erasure of H4R3me(2(s)), which is directly read by 7SK snRNA, and decapping/demethylation of 7SK snRNA, ensuring the dismissal of the 7SK snRNA/HEXIM inhibitory complex. The interactions of both JMJD6 and Brd4 with the P-TEFb complex permit its activation and pause release of regulated coding genes. The functions of JMJD6/ Brd4-associated dual histone and RNA demethylase activity on anti-pause enhancers have intriguing implications for these proteins in development, homeostasis, and disease. 

25437913|a|Reported RAF kinase domain structures adopt a side-to-side dimer configuration reflective of an 'on' state that underpins an allosteric mechanism of regulation. Atomic details of the monomer 'off' state have been elusive. Reinspection of the BRAF kinase domain structures revealed that sulfonamide inhibitors induce features of an off state, primarily a laterally displaced helix αC stabilized by the activation segment helix 1 (AS-H1). These features correlated with the ability of sulfonamides to disrupt human BRAF homodimers in cells, in vitro and in crystals yielding a structure of BRAF in a monomer state. The crystal structure revealed exaggerated, nonproductive positions of helix αC and AS-H1, the latter of which is the target of potent BRAF oncogenic mutations. Together, this work provides formal proof of an allosteric link between the RAF dimer interface, the activation segment and the catalytic infrastructure. 

24412932|a|Increasing evidence suggests that the c-Abl protein tyrosine kinase could play a role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) and other neurodegenerative disorders. c-Abl has been shown to regulate the degradation of two proteins implicated in the pathogenesis of PD, parkin and α-synuclein (α-syn). The inhibition of parkin's neuroprotective functions is regulated by c-Abl-mediated phosphorylation of parkin. However, the molecular mechanisms by which c-Abl activity regulates α-syn toxicity and clearance remain unknown. Herein, using NMR spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, in vitro enzymatic assays and cell-based studies, we established that α-syn is a bona fide substrate for c-Abl. In vitro studies demonstrate that c-Abl directly interacts with α-syn and catalyzes its phosphorylation mainly at tyrosine 39 (pY39) and to a lesser extent at tyrosine 125 (pY125). Analysis of human brain tissues showed that pY39 α-syn is detected in the brains of healthy individuals and those with PD. However, only c-Abl protein levels were found to be upregulated in PD brains. Interestingly, nilotinib, a specific inhibitor of c-Abl kinase activity, induces α-syn protein degradation via the autophagy and proteasome pathways, whereas the overexpression of α-syn in the rat midbrains enhances c-Abl expression. Together, these data suggest that changes in c-Abl expression, activation and/or c-Abl-mediated phosphorylation of Y39 play a role in regulating α-syn clearance and contribute to the pathogenesis of PD. 

25535969|a|Histone lysine (K) residues, which are modified by methyl- and acetyl-transferases, diversely regulate RNA synthesis. Unlike the ubiquitously activating effect of histone K acetylation, the effects of histone K methylation vary with the number of methyl groups added and with the position of these groups in the histone tails. Histone K demethylases (KDMs) counteract the activity of methyl-transferases and remove methyl group(s) from specific K residues in histones. KDM3A (also known as JHDM2A or JMJD1A) is an H3K9me2/1 demethylase. KDM3A performs diverse functions via the regulation of its associated genes, which are involved in spermatogenesis, metabolism, and cell differentiation. However, the mechanism by which the activity of KDM3A is regulated is largely unknown. Here, we demonstrated that mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1) specifically phosphorylates KDM3A at Ser264 (p-KDM3A), which is enriched in the regulatory regions of gene loci in the human genome. p-KDM3A directly interacts with and is recruited by the transcription factor Stat1 to activate p-KDM3A target genes under heat shock conditions. The demethylation of H3K9me2 at the Stat1 binding site specifically depends on the co-expression of p-KDM3A in the heat-shocked cells. In contrast to heat shock, IFN-γ treatment does not phosphorylate KDM3A via MSK1, thereby abrogating its downstream effects. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence that a KDM can be modified via phosphorylation to determine its specific binding to target genes in response to thermal stress. 

24265246|a|Pin1, a conserved eukaryotic Peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase, has profound effects on numerous key-signaling molecules, and its deregulation contributes to disease, particularly cancer. Although Pin1-mediated prolyl isomerization is an essential and novel regulatory mechanism for protein phosphorylation, little is known about the upstream signaling pathway(s) that regulates Pin1 activity. Here, we identify MAP3K-related serine-threonine kinase (the gene encoding COT/Tpl2) as a kinase responsible for phosphorylation of Pin1 Ser16. COT interacts with and phosphorylates Pin1 on Ser16. Consequently, Pin1 Ser16 phosphorylation by COT increases cyclin D1 abundance and enhances tumorigenecity of MCF7 cells. In contrast, depletion of COT in MCF7 cells leads to downregulation of Pin1 Ser16 phosphorylation, which subsequently decrease cyclin D1 levels, inhibiting tumorigenecity of MCF7 cells. In a xenograft model, treatment of TKI, a COT inhibitor, and Juglone, a Pin1 inhibitor, abrogates tumor growth. In human breast cancer patients, immunohistochemical staining shows that Pin1 pSer16 levels are positively correlated with COT levels, providing strong evidence for an essential role of the COT/Pin1 axis in conveying oncogenic signals to promote aggressiveness in human breast cancer.

24434208|a|Coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1), a coactivator for various cancer-relevant transcription factors, is overexpressed in breast cancer. To elucidate the functions of CARM1 in tumorigenesis, we knocked out CARM1 from several breast cancer cell lines using Zinc-Finger Nuclease technology, which resulted in drastic phenotypic and biochemical changes. The CARM1 KO cell lines enabled identification of CARM1 substrates, notably the SWI/SNF core subunit BAF155. Methylation of BAF155 at R1064 was found to be an independent prognostic biomarker for cancer recurrence and to regulate breast cancer cell migration and metastasis. Furthermore, CARM1-mediated BAF155 methylation affects gene expression by directing methylated BAF155 to unique chromatin regions (e.g., c-Myc pathway genes). Collectively, our studies uncover a mechanism by which BAF155 acquires tumorigenic functions via arginine methylation.

15197186|a|NDR (nuclear Dbf2-related) kinase belongs to a family of kinases that is highly conserved throughout the eukaryotic world. We showed previously that NDR is regulated by phosphorylation and by the Ca(2+)-binding protein, S100B. The budding yeast relatives of Homo sapiens NDR, Cbk1, and Dbf2, were shown to interact with Mob2 (Mps one binder 2) and Mob1, respectively. This interaction is required for the activity and biological function of these kinases. In this study, we show that hMOB1, the closest relative of yeast Mob1 and Mob2, stimulates NDR kinase activity and interacts with NDR both in vivo and in vitro. The point mutations of highly conserved residues within the N-terminal domain of NDR reduced NDR kinase activity as well as human MOB1 binding. A novel feature of NDR kinases is an insert within the catalytic domain between subdomains VII and VIII. The amino acid sequence within this insert shows a high basic amino acid content in all of the kinases of the NDR family known to interact with MOB proteins. We show that this sequence is autoinhibitory, and our data indicate that the binding of human MOB1 to the N-terminal domain of NDR induces the release of this autoinhibition.

15220471|a|Longevity regulatory genes include the Forkhead transcription factor FOXO and the NAD-dependent histone deacetylase silent information regulator 2 (Sir2). Genetic studies demonstrate that Sir2 acts to extend lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans upstream of DAF-16, a member of the FOXO family, in the insulin-like signaling pathway. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the requirement of DAF-16 activity in Sir2-mediated longevity remain unknown. Here we show that reversible acetylation of Foxo1 (also known as FKHR), the mouse DAF-16 ortholog, modulates its transactivation function. cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein binds and acetylates Foxo1 at the K242, K245, and K262 residues, the modification of which is involved in the attenuation of Foxo1 as a transcription factor. Conversely, Sir2 binds and deacetylates Foxo1 at residues acetylated by cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding protein. Sir2 is recruited to insulin response sequence-containing promoter and increases the expression of manganese superoxide dismutase and p27(kip1) in a deacetylase-activity-dependent manner. Our findings establish Foxo1 as a direct and functional target for Sir2 in mammalian systems.

15225637|a|The regulatory beta-subunit of protein kinase CK2 mediates the formation of the CK2 tetrameric form and it has functions independent of CK2 catalytic subunit through interaction with several intracellular proteins. Recently, we have shown that CK2beta associates with the human checkpoint kinase Chk1. In this study, we show that Chk1 specifically phosphorylates in vitro the regulatory beta-subunit of CK2. Chymotryptic peptides and mutational analyses have revealed that CK2beta is phosphorylated at Thr213. Formation of a stable complex between CK2beta and Chk1 is not affected by the modification of Thr213 but it does require the presence of an active Chk1 kinase.

15225643|a|Bcl-2 protein play important roles in the regulation of apoptosis. We previously reported that the phosphorylation of Bcl-2 was augmented by treatment with protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) inhibitor; however, the kinase responsible for Bcl-2 phosphorylation had not yet been identified. In this study, we identified extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) as the responsible kinase for the phosphorylation of Bcl-2. We also found that the transmembrane region (TM) deleted form of Bcl-2 (Bcl-2DeltaTM), which was unable to localize on the mitochondria was constitutively phosphorylated, whereas wild-type Bcl-2 that localized on the mitochondria, was present in its hypophosphorylated form. The phosphorylation of Bcl-2DeltaTM was retarded by treatment with MAP kinase ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitor and PP2A did not bind to Bcl-2DeltaTM. These observations suggest that Bcl-2DeltaTM is constitutively phosphorylated by ERK, but is not dephosphorylated by PP2A in human tumor cell lines. The phosphorylation of Bcl-2 resulted in a reduction in anti-apoptotic function, implying that dephosphorylation promoted the anti-apoptotic activity of Bcl-2 protein in human tumor cell lines. Thus, the present findings suggest that ERK and PP2A are physiological regulators of Bcl-2 phosphorylation, and these enzymes exert an influence on the anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-2.

15226396|a|The function of Type 1, classic cadherins depends on their association with the actin cytoskeleton, a connection mediated by alpha- and beta-catenin. The phosphorylation state of beta-catenin is crucial for its association with cadherin and thus the association of cadherin with the cytoskeleton. We now show that the phosphorylation of beta-catenin is regulated by the combined activities of the tyrosine kinase Fer and the tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B. Fer phosphorylates PTP1B at tyrosine 152, regulating its binding to cadherin and the continuous dephosphorylation of beta-catenin at tyrosine 654. Fer interacts with cadherin indirectly, through p120ctn. We have mapped the interaction domains of Fer and p120ctn and peptides corresponding to these sequences release Fer from p120ctn in vitro and in live cells, resulting in loss of cadherin-associated PTP1B, an increase in the pool of tyrosine phosphorylated beta-catenin and loss of cadherin adhesion function. The effect of the peptides is lost when a beta-catenin mutant with a substitution at tyrosine 654 is introduced into cells. Thus, Fer phosphorylates PTP1B at tyrosine 152 enabling it to bind to the cytoplasmic domain of cadherin, where it maintains beta-catenin in a dephosphorylated state. Cultured fibroblasts from mouse embryos targeted with a kinase-inactivating ferD743R mutation have lost cadherin-associated PTP1B and beta-catenin, as well as localization of cadherin and beta-catenin in areas of cell-cell contacts. Expression of wild-type Fer or culture in epidermal growth factor restores the cadherin complex and localization at cell-cell contacts.

15225631|a|Integrin-filamin binding plays an important role in adhesion-mediated control of the actin cytoskeleton. Here, using the interaction between recombinant fragments from the C-terminus of filamin A and the cytoplasmic tail of integrin beta 7 as a model, we report a negative regulatory role for filamin alternative splicing. Splice variant forms of filamin A lacking a 41-amino acid segment interacted more strongly than full-length fragments. In addition, we provide evidence that phosphorylation of the splice variant region is unlikely to represent the mechanism by which binding is reduced.

15103385|a|COP1 (constitutively photomorphogenic 1) is a RING-finger-containing protein that functions to repress plant photomorphogenesis, the light-mediated programme of plant development. Mutants of COP1 are constitutively photomorphogenic, and this has been attributed to their inability to negatively regulate the proteins LAF1 (ref. 1) and HY5 (ref. 2). The role of COP1 in mammalian cells is less well characterized. Here we identify the tumour-suppressor protein p53 as a COP1-interacting protein. COP1 increases p53 turnover by targeting it for degradation by the proteasome in a ubiquitin-dependent fashion, independently of MDM2 or Pirh2, which are known to interact with and negatively regulate p53. Moreover, COP1 serves as an E3 ubiquitin ligase for p53 in vitro and in vivo, and inhibits p53-dependent transcription and apoptosis. Depletion of COP1 by short interfering RNA (siRNA) stabilizes p53 and arrests cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Furthermore, we identify COP1 as a p53-inducible gene, and show that the depletion of COP1 and MDM2 by siRNA cooperatively sensitizes U2-OS cells to ionizing-radiation-induced cell death. Overall, these results indicate that COP1 is a critical negative regulator of p53 and represents a new pathway for maintaining p53 at low levels in unstressed cells.

15115762|a|Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the SCA7 gene leading to elongation of a polyglutamine tract in ataxin-7, a protein of unknown function. A putative ataxin-7 yeast orthologue (SGF73) has been identified recently as a new component of the SAGA (Spt/Ada/Gcn5 acetylase) multisubunit complex, a coactivator required for transcription of a subset of RNA polymerase II-dependent genes. We show here that ataxin-7 is an integral component of the mammalian SAGA-like complexes, the TATA-binding protein-free TAF-containing complex (TFTC) and the SPT3/TAF9/GCN5 acetyltransferase complex (STAGA). In agreement, immunoprecipitation of ataxin-7 retained a histone acetyltransferase activity, characteristic for TFTC-like complexes. We further identified a minimal domain in ataxin-7 that is required for interaction with TFTC/STAGA subunits and is conserved highly through evolution, allowing the identification of a SCA7 gene family. We showed that this domain contains a conserved Cys(3)His motif that binds zinc, forming a new zinc-binding domain. Finally, polyglutamine expansion in ataxin-7 did not affect its incorporation into TFTC/STAGA complexes purified from SCA7 patient cells. We demonstrate here that ataxin-7 is the human orthologue of the yeast SAGA SGF73 subunit and is a bona fide subunit of the human TFTC-like transcriptional complexes.

15105425|a|In the human kinome, vaccinia-related kinase-1 (VRK1) is a new Ser-Thr kinase associated with proliferating tissues. VRK1 colocalizes with ATF2 in the nucleus and can form a stable complex. We have studied the phosphorylation of the transcription factor ATF2, which regulates gene expression by forming dimers with proteins with basic region-leucine zipper domains and recognizing cAMP-response element or AP1 sequences implicated in cellular responses to stress. VRK1 phosphorylates ATF2 mainly on Thr-73, stabilizing the ATF2 protein and increasing its intracellular level. Mutagenesis studies showed that Thr-73 and Ser-62 are implicated in ATF2 transcriptional activation by VRK1 detected in a functional assay based on ATF2 dimerization. VRK1 can activate the collagenase gene promoter that is regulated by ATF2 in a dose-dependent manner. Loss of kinase activity (K179E mutant) or the T73A substitution in ATF2 prevents both its accumulation and activation of transcription. VRK1 and JNK, which phosphorylates ATF2 in Thr-69 and Thr-71, have an additive effect on ATF2-dependent transcription at suboptimal doses. Therefore, two groups of amino acids in the ATF2 amino-terminal region can integrate different cellular signals mediated by at least five different kinases. VRK1 is an element of a novel signaling pathway that regulates gene transcription.

20203130|a|Epigenetic modifications of chromatin play an important role in the regulation of gene expression. KMT4/Dot1 is a conserved histone methyltransferase capable of methylating chromatin on Lys79 of histone H3 (H3K79). Here we report the identification of a multisubunit Dot1 complex (DotCom), which includes several of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) partners in leukemia such as ENL, AF9/MLLT3, AF17/MLLT6, and AF10/MLLT10, as well as the known Wnt pathway modifiers TRRAP, Skp1, and beta-catenin. We demonstrated that the human DotCom is indeed capable of trimethylating H3K79 and, given the association of beta-catenin, Skp1, and TRRAP, we investigated, and found, a role for Dot1 in Wnt/Wingless signaling in an in vivo model system. Knockdown of Dot1 in Drosophila results in decreased expression of a subset of Wingless target genes. Furthermore, the loss of expression for the Drosophila homologs of the Dot1-associated proteins involved in the regulation of H3K79 shows a similar reduction in expression of these Wingless targets. From yeast to human, specific trimethylation of H3K79 by Dot1 requires the monoubiquitination of histone H2B by the Rad6/Bre1 complex. Here, we demonstrate that depletion of Bre1, the E3 ligase required for H2B monoubiquitination, leads specifically to reduced bulk H3K79 trimethylation levels and a reduction in expression of many Wingless targets. Overall, our study describes for the first time the components of DotCom and links the specific regulation of H3K79 trimethylation by Dot1 and its associated factors to the Wnt/Wingless signaling pathway.

15169888|a|NF-kappa B1 p105 forms a high-affinity, stoichiometric interaction with TPL-2, a MEK kinase essential for TLR4 activation of the ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages. Interaction with p105 is required to maintain TPL-2 metabolic stability and also negatively regulates TPL-2 MEK kinase activity. Here, affinity purification identified A20-binding inhibitor of NF-kappa B 2 (ABIN-2) as a novel p105-associated protein. Cotransfection experiments demonstrated that ABIN-2 could interact with TPL-2 in addition to p105 but preferentially formed a ternary complex with both proteins. Consistently, in unstimulated bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), a substantial fraction of endogenous ABIN-2 was associated with both p105 and TPL-2. Although the majority of TPL-2 in these cells was complexed with ABIN-2, the pool of TPL-2 which could activate MEK after LPS stimulation was not, and LPS activation of TPL-2 was found to correlate with its release from ABIN-2. Depletion of ABIN-2 by RNA interference dramatically reduced steady-state levels of TPL-2 protein without affecting levels of TPL-2 mRNA or p105 protein. In addition, ABIN-2 increased the half-life of cotransfected TPL-2. Thus, optimal TPL-2 stability in vivo requires interaction with ABIN-2 as well as p105. Together, these data raise the possibility that ABIN-2 functions in the TLR4 signaling pathway which regulates TPL-2 activation.

15070733|a|Wee1, the Cdc2 inhibitory kinase, needs to be down-regulated at the onset of mitosis to ensure rapid activation of Cdc2. Previously, we have shown that human somatic Wee1 (Wee1A) is down-regulated both by protein phosphorylation and degradation, but the underlying mechanisms had not been elucidated. In the present study, we have identified the beta-transducin repeat-containing protein 1/2 (beta-TrCP1/2) F-box protein-containing SKP1/Cul1/F-box protein (SCF) complex (SCF(beta-TrCP1/2)) as an E3 ubiquitin ligase for Wee1A ubiquitination. Although Wee1A lacks a consensus DS(p)GXXS(p) phospho-dependent binding motif for beta-TrCP, recognition of Wee1A by beta-TrCP depended on phosphorylation, and two serine residues in Wee1A, S53 and S123, were found to be the most important phosphorylation sites for beta-TrCP recognition. We have found also that the major M-phase kinases polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) and Cdc2 are responsible for the phosphorylation of S53 and S123, respectively, and that in each case phosphorylation generates an unconventional phospho-degron (signal for degradation) that can be recognized by beta-TrCP. Phosphorylation of Wee1A by these kinases cooperatively stimulated the recognition and ubiquitination of Wee1A by SCF(beta-TrCP1/2) in vitro. Mutation of these residues or depletion of beta-TrCP by small-interfering RNA treatment increased the stability of Wee1A in HeLa cells. Moreover, our analysis indicates that beta-TrCP-dependent degradation of Wee1A is important for the normal onset of M-phase in vivo. These results also establish the existence of a feedback loop between Cdc2 and Wee1A in somatic cells that depends on ubiquitination and protein degradation and ensures the rapid activation of Cdc2 when cells are ready to divide.

15161910|a|We previously reported that Nek11, a member of the NIMA (never-in-mitosis A) family of kinases, is activated in G(1)/S-arrested cells. We provide herein several lines of evidence for a novel interaction between Nek11 and Nek2A. Both Nek11 and Nek2A, but not Nek2B, were detected at nucleoli, and the Nek2A-specific C-terminal end (amino acids 399-445) was responsible for nucleolar localization. Endogenous Nek11 coimmunoprecipitated with endogenous Nek2A, and non-catalytic regions of each kinase were involved in the complex formation. Nek11L interacted with phosphorylated Nek2A but barely with the kinase-inactive Nek2A (K37R) mutant. In addition, both Nek2A autophosphorylation activity and the Nek11L-Nek2A complex formation increased in G(1)/S-arrested cells. These results indicate that autophosphorylation of Nek2A could stimulate its interaction with Nek11L at the nucleolus. Moreover, Nek2 directly phosphorylated Nek11 in the C-terminal non-catalytic region and elevated Nek11 kinase activity. The non-catalytic region of Nek11 showed autoinhibitory activity through intramolecular interaction with its N-terminal catalytic domain. Nek2 dissociated this autoinhibitory interaction. Altogether, our studies demonstrate a unique mechanism of Nek11 activation by Nek2A in G(1)/S-arrested cells and suggest a novel possibility for nucleolar function of the NIMA family.

15044604|a|Two members of the human testis-specific serine/threonine (Ser/Thr) kinase family, TSSK 1 and TSSK 2, were cloned and sequenced from a human testis adaptor-ligated cDNA library using a PCR strategy. Within the cDNA, open reading frames (ORF) were defined encoding proteins of 367 and 358 amino acids respectively, as well as conserved kinase domains typical of the superfamily of Ser/Thr kinases. Both genes were intronless and mapped to chromosomes 5 and 22 respectively. The human and mouse homologues of TSSK 1 and TSSK 2, together with TSSK 3 and SSTK/FKSG82, constitute a kinase subfamily closely related to the calmodulin kinases and SNF/nim 1 kinase subfamilies. Similar to the mouse, tissue expression by northern and dot blot analysis revealed that human TSSK 1 and 2 messages are expressed exclusively in the testis. However, mRNA for these kinases can be detected in other tissues using real-time PCR. In addition, TSKS, the human homologue of a putative substrate of TSSK 1 and 2, was cloned. TSKS had an ORF of 592 amino acids and was also expressed exclusively in the testis as demonstrated by northern and dot blot analyses; however, lower levels of expression in other tissues were detected using real-time PCR. Human TSSK 2 and TSKS interacted in a yeast two-hybrid system and also co-immunoprecipitated after in vitro translation. TSSK 2 expressed in yeast and bacteria was able to autophosphorylate and also phosphorylated recombinant TSKS in vitro. Antibodies against recombinant TSSK 2 demonstrated that a member of the TSSK family was present in human testis and localized to the equatorial segment of ejaculated human sperm. In contrast, TSKS was only found in the testis. The finding of a TSSK family member in mature sperm suggests that this family of kinases might play a role in sperm function.

15138274|a|The molecular architecture of six-subunit yeast holo-Elongator complex was investigated by the use of immunoprecipitation, two-hybrid interaction mapping, and in vitro studies of binary interactions between individual subunits. Surprisingly, Elp2 is dispensable for the integrity of the holo-Elongator complex, and a purified five-subunit elp2 Delta Elongator complex retains histone acetyltransferase activity in vitro. These results indicate that the WD40 repeats in Elp2 are required neither for subunit-subunit interactions within Elongator nor for Elongator interaction with histones during catalysis. Elp2 and Elp4 were largely dispensable for the association of Elongator with nascent RNA transcript in vivo. In contrast, Elongator-RNA interaction requires the Elp3 protein. Together, these data shed light on the structure-function relationship of the Elongator complex.

20347885|a|Dual specificity phosphatases are characterised by their ability to dephosphorylate both phosphotyrosine and phosphoserine/threonine residues within the one substrate. The aim of this study was to characterise the phosphatase activity of the atypical dual specificity phosphatase, DUSP26 on MAP kinases, and to determine its expression, regulation and function in cancer cells. Overexpression and knockdown of DUSP26 in epithelial cells and in vitro phosphatase assays were used to demonstrate that, contrary to several published reports, DUSP26 does not act as a dual specificity phosphatase on ERK, JNK or p38 MAPKs. However, overexpression of DUSP26 in MCF10A epithelial cells suppressed colony formation and acinar growth in 3D culture, effects dependent on its phosphatase activity, while knockdown of DUSP26 in HOSE17.1 cells enhanced colony formation and cellular proliferation. DUSP26 mRNA expression was reduced in neuroblastoma, brain and ovarian cancer cell lines. Consistent with epigenetic silencing of DUSP26, expression was enhanced by treatment of cells with 5-aza-2-deoxycitidine and trichostatin A, and a CpG island upstream of the DUSP26 transcriptional start site was variably methylated in cancer cell lines. Together, these results help to clarify confusion in the literature relating to DUSP26 substrate specificity and support recent reports that substrates other than MAPKs are the primary substrates of this phosphatase. In addition, they indicate that DUSP26 may function as a tumour suppressor in particular cancers.

15037601|a|The Golgi apparatus has long been suggested to be important for directing secretion to specific sites on the plasma membrane in response to extracellular signaling events. However, the mechanisms by which signaling events are coordinated with Golgi apparatus function remain poorly understood. Here, we identify a scaffolding function for the Golgi matrix protein GM130 that sheds light on how such signaling events may be regulated. We show that the mammalian Ste20 kinases YSK1 and MST4 target to the Golgi apparatus via the Golgi matrix protein GM130. In addition, GM130 binding activates these kinases by promoting autophosphorylation of a conserved threonine within the T-loop. Interference with YSK1 function perturbs perinuclear Golgi organization, cell migration, and invasion into type I collagen. A biochemical screen identifies 14-3-3zeta as a specific substrate for YSK1 that localizes to the Golgi apparatus, and potentially links YSK1 signaling at the Golgi apparatus with protein transport events, cell adhesion, and polarity complexes important for cell migration.

15147888|a|To explore more hNinein interacting proteins, the yeast two-hybrid screening using ninein C-terminal domain as bait protein was performed. One novel gene, CGI-99, was demonstrated to associate with hNinein in the yeast two-hybrid method and in vitro GST pull-down assay. Molecular characterization also showed that CGI-99 possessed a transcriptional activity at the N-terminal. In addition, CGI-99 formed a dimer with the C-terminal, which overlapped with hNinein binding site. In kinase assay, CGI-99 binds to hNinein and completely blocks the phosphorylation of hNinein by GSK3beta. Moreover, CGI-99 was highly expressed in all brain tumors which is in agreement with the Northern blot analysis. Taken together, we have isolated a novel protein CGI-99, which may be involved in the functional regulation of human ninein in the centrosome structure and may also be important in brain development and tumorigenesis.

17380128|a|The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRB) plays a critical role in the control of cell proliferation and in the DNA damage checkpoints. pRB inhibits cell cycle progression through interactions with the E2F family of transcription factors. Here, we report that DNA damage induced not only the dephosphorylation of pRB at Cdk phosphorylation sites and the binding of pRB to E2F-1, but also the phosphorylation of pRB at Ser612. Phosphorylation of pRB at Ser612 enhanced the formation of a complex between pRB and E2F-1. Substitution of Ser612 with Ala decreased pRB-E2F-1 binding and the transcriptional repression activity. Until now, Ser612 of pRB has been thought to be phosphorylated by Cdk2. However, the phosphorylation of pRB at Ser612 was conducted by Chk1/2 after DNA damage, and inhibition of ATM-Chk1/2 activity suppressed the phosphorylation of Ser612 and the binding of pRB to E2F-1. These results suggest that Ser612 is phosphorylated by Chk1/2 after DNA damage, leading to the formation of pRB-E2F-1. This is the first report that pRB is phosphorylated in vivo by a kinase other than Cdk.

17408621|a|Substantial actin remodelling occurs prior to mitosis as cells alter their shape in preparation for cytokinesis. In mammalian cells, mitosis is initiated by a heterodimer of cyclin B1 and the cyclin dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) serine/threonine kinase. In this report. we show that human cyclin B1 binds the actin cross-linking protein Filamin-A (FLNa). The proteins co-immunoprecipitate and co-localize in mitotic human cells. We find that cyclin B1/Cdk1 can phosphorylate FLNa in vitro and reduce its ability to gelate actin. We have also identified serine 1436 as one FLNa residue phosphorylated by cyclin B1/Cdk1 in vitro. Our results suggest a role for cyclin B1/Cdk1 in FLNa-dependent actin remodelling.

17380123|a|The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway plays an important role in stress-induced cell-fate decisions by orchestrating responses that go from cell-cycle arrest to apoptosis. We have identified a new p38 MAPK-regulated protein that we named p18(Hamlet), which becomes stabilized and accumulates in response to certain genotoxic stresses such as UV or cisplatin treatment. Overexpression of p18(Hamlet) is sufficient to induce apoptosis, whereas its downregulation reduces the apoptotic response to these DNA damage-inducing agents. We show that p18(Hamlet) interacts with p53 and stimulates the transcription of several proapoptotic p53 target genes such as PUMA and NOXA. This correlates with enhanced p18(Hamlet)-induced recruitment of p53 to the promoters. In proliferating cells, low steady-state levels of p18(Hamlet) are probably maintained by a p53-dependent negative feedback loop. Therefore, p18(Hamlet) is a new cell-fate regulator that links the p38 MAPK and p53 pathways and contributes to the establishment of p53-regulated stress responses.

17416557|a|In an approach to gain insight into the sequence-dependent dephosphorylation of multiple phosphotyrosyl-containing peptides by the phosphatases SHP-1 and PTP1B, we applied a chromatographic technique for the analysis of the dephosphorylation products. Mono-, bi- and triphosphorylated reference peptides corresponding to positions 1999-2014 in the activation loop of the receptor tyrosine kinase Ros were first analyzed by reversed-phase HPLC and MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. Then, the respective products from enzymatic treatment were investigated by HPLC and compared to the standard peptides. The results obtained in this study emphasize the advantage of monitoring phosphatase reactions for mono- and biphosphorylated peptides using the described procedure rather than spectrophotometric and fluorimetric methods that do not allow for a clear identification of the products formed.

17382325|a|Posttranslational modifications of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) influence HIF-mediated transcription, likely by affecting binding to p300/cAMP-response element-binding protein (CBP). To systematically analyze the HIF-1alpha-p300/CBP interaction, we developed a fluorescence polarization-based binding assay, employing fluorescein-labeled peptides derived from the C-terminal transactivation domain (C-TAD) of HIF-1alpha. After optimized for effectively capturing p300/CBP, the assay was utilized for evaluating direct effects of posttranslational modifications of the HIF-1alpha C-TAD on p300 binding. The results demonstrated that asparagine hydroxylation and S-nitrosylation of HIF-1alpha decrease p300 binding, while its phosphorylation does not affect p300 binding, which was reconfirmed by competitive inhibition analyses using mutant peptides.

17360743|a|Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections of the squamous epithelium are associated with high-level expression of the E1circumflexE4 protein during the productive phase of infection. However, the precise mechanisms of how E1circumflexE4 contributes to the replication cycle of the virus are poorly understood. Here, we show that the serine-arginine (SR)-specific protein kinase SRPK1 is a novel binding partner of HPV type 1 (HPV1) E1circumflexE4. We map critical residues within an arginine-rich domain of HPV1 E1circumflexE4, and in a region known to facilitate E1circumflexE4 oligomerization, that are requisite for SRPK1 binding. In vitro kinase assays show that SRPK1 binding is associated with phosphorylation of an HPV1 E1circumflexE4 polypeptide and modulates autophosphorylation of the kinase. We show that SRPK1 is sequestered into E4 inclusion bodies in terminally differentiated cells within HPV1 warts and that colocalization between E1circumflexE4 and SRPK1 is not dependent on additional HPV1 factors. Moreover, we also identify SRPK1 binding of E1circumflexE4 proteins of HPV16 and HPV18. Our findings indicate that SRPK1 binding is a conserved function of E1circumflexE4 proteins of diverse virus types. SRPK1 influences important biochemical processes within the cell, including nuclear organization and RNA metabolism. While phosphorylation of HPV1 E4 by SRPK1 may directly influence HPV1 E4 function during the infectious cycle, the modulation and sequestration of SRPK1 by E1circumflexE4 may affect the ability of SRPK1 to phosphorylate its cellular targets, thereby facilitating the productive phase of the HPV replication cycle.

17389360|a|Transcription, splicing, and translation are potentially coordinately regulatable in a temporospatial-dependent manner, although supporting experimental evidence for this notion is scarce. Yeast two-hybrid screening of a mammary gland cDNA library with human p21-activated kinase 1 (Pak1) as bait identified polyC-RNA-binding protein 1 (PCBP1), which controls translation from mRNAs containing the DICE (differentiation control element). Mitogenic stimulation of human cells phosphorylated PCBP1 on threonines 60 and 127 in a Pak1-sensitive manner. Pak1-dependent phosphorylation of PCBP1 released its binding and translational inhibition from a DICE-minigene. Overexpression of PCBP1 also inhibited the translation of the endogenous L1 cell adhesion molecule mRNA, which contains two DICE motifs in the 3' untranslated region. We also found that Pak1 activation led to an increased nuclear retention of PCBP1, recruitment to the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) promoter, and stimulation of eIF4E expression in a Pak1-sensitive manner. Moreover, mitogenic stimulation promoted Pak1- and PCBP1-dependent alternative splicing and exon inclusion from a CD44 minigene. The alternative splicing functions of PCBP1 were in turn mediated by its intrinsic interaction with Caper alpha, a U2 snRNP auxiliary factor-related protein previously implicated in RNA splicing. These findings establish the principle that a single coregulator can function as a signal-dependent and coordinated regulator of transcription, splicing, and translation.

17468742|a|Gene transcription is critically influenced by chromatin structure and the modification status of histone tails. Methylation of lysine residues in histone tails is dynamically regulated by the opposing activities of histone methyltransferases and histone demethylases. Here we show that JARID1C/SMCX, a JmjC-domain-containing protein implicated in X-linked mental retardation and epilepsy, possesses H3K4 tri-demethylase activity and functions as a transcriptional repressor. An SMCX complex isolated from HeLa cells contains additional chromatin modifiers (the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, and the histone H3K9 methyltransferase G9a) and the transcriptional repressor REST, suggesting a direct role for SMCX in chromatin dynamics and REST-mediated repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals that SMCX and REST co-occupy the neuron-restrictive silencing elements in the promoters of a subset of REST target genes. RNA-interference-mediated depletion of SMCX derepresses several of these targets and simultaneously increases H3K4 trimethylation at the sodium channel type 2A (SCN2A) and synapsin I (SYN1) promoters. We propose that loss of SMCX activity impairs REST-mediated neuronal gene regulation, thereby contributing to SMCX-associated X-linked mental retardation.

17360471|a|The steroid hormone aldosterone is secreted both in the setting of intravascular volume depletion and hyperkalemia, raising the question of how the kidney maximizes NaCl reabsorption in the former state while maximizing K(+) secretion in the latter. Mutations in WNK4 cause pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII), a disease featuring increased renal NaCl reabsorption and impaired K(+) secretion. PHAII-mutant WNK4 achieves these effects by increasing activity of the Na-Cl cotransporter (NCC) and the Na(+) channel ENaC while concurrently inhibiting the renal outer medullary K(+) channel (ROMK). We now describe a functional state for WNK4 that promotes increased, rather than decreased, K(+) secretion. We show that WNK4 is phosphorylated by SGK1, a mediator of aldosterone signaling. Whereas wild-type WNK4 inhibits the activity of both ENaC and ROMK, a WNK4 mutation that mimics phosphorylation at the SGK1 site (WNK4(S1169D)) alleviates inhibition of both channels. The net result of these effects in the kidney would be increased K(+) secretion, because of both increased electrogenic Na(+) reabsorption and increased apical membrane K(+) permeability. Thus, modification at the PHAII and SGK1 sites in WNK4 impart opposite effects on K(+) secretion, decreasing or increasing ROMK activity and net K(+) secretion, respectively. This functional state for WNK4 would thus promote the desired physiologic response to hyperkalemia, and the fact that it is induced downstream of aldosterone signaling implicates WNK4 in the physiologic response to aldosterone with hyperkalemia. Together, the different states of WNK4 allow the kidney to provide distinct and appropriate integrated responses to intravascular volume depletion and hyperkalemia.

17349580|a|Mutations in the EGFR kinase are a cause of non-small-cell lung cancer. To understand their mechanism of activation and effects on drug binding, we studied the kinetics of the L858R and G719S mutants and determined their crystal structures with inhibitors including gefitinib, AEE788, and a staurosporine. We find that the mutations activate the kinase by disrupting autoinhibitory interactions, and that they accelerate catalysis as much as 50-fold in vitro. Structures of inhibitors in complex with both wild-type and mutant kinases reveal similar binding modes for gefitinib and AEE788, but a marked rotation of the staurosporine in the G719S mutant. Strikingly, direct binding measurements show that gefitinib binds 20-fold more tightly to the L858R mutant than to the wild-type enzyme.

17320160|a|Histone methylation regulates chromatin structure and transcription. The recently identified histone demethylase lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) is chemically restricted to demethylation of only mono- and di- but not trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3). We show that the X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) gene SMCX (JARID1C), which encodes a JmjC-domain protein, reversed H3K4me3 to di- and mono- but not unmethylated products. Other SMCX family members, including SMCY, RBP2, and PLU-1, also demethylated H3K4me3. SMCX bound H3K9me3 via its N-terminal PHD (plant homeodomain) finger, which may help coordinate H3K4 demethylation and H3K9 methylation in transcriptional repression. Significantly, several XLMR-patient point mutations reduced SMCX demethylase activity and binding to H3K9me3 peptides, respectively. Importantly, studies in zebrafish and primary mammalian neurons demonstrated a role for SMCX in neuronal survival and dendritic development and a link to the demethylase activity. Our findings thus identify a family of H3K4me3 demethylases and uncover a critical link between histone modifications and XLMR.

17350576|a|Actin filament formation and turnover within the treadmilling actin filament array at the leading edge of migrating cells are interdependent and coupled, but the mechanisms coordinating these two activities are not understood. We report that Coronin 1B interacts simultaneously with Arp2/3 complex and Slingshot (SSH1L) phosphatase, two regulators of actin filament formation and turnover, respectively. Coronin 1B inhibits filament nucleation by Arp2/3 complex and this inhibition is attenuated by phosphorylation of Coronin 1B at Serine 2, a site targeted by SSH1L. Coronin 1B also directs SSH1L to lamellipodia where SSH1L likely regulates Cofilin activity via dephosphorylation. Accordingly, depleting Coronin 1B increases phospho-Cofilin levels, and alters lamellipodial dynamics and actin filament architecture at the leading edge. We conclude that Coronin 1B's coordination of filament formation by Arp2/3 complex and filament turnover by Cofilin is required for effective lamellipodial protrusion and cell migration.

17349581|a|Oncogenic Kras initiates pancreatic tumorigenesis, while subsequent genetic events shape the resultant disease. We show here that concomitant expression of Kras(G12D) and haploinsufficiency of the Smad4/Dpc4 tumor suppressor gene engenders a distinct class of pancreatic tumors, mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs), which culminate in invasive ductal adenocarcinomas. Disease evolves along a progression scheme analogous to, but distinct from, the classical PanIN-to-ductal adenocarcinoma sequence, and also portends a markedly different prognosis. Progression of MCNs is accompanied by LOH of Dpc4 and mutation of either p53 or p16. Thus, these distinct phenotypic routes to invasive adenocarcinoma nevertheless share the same overall mutational spectra. Our findings suggest that the sequence, as well as the context, in which these critical mutations are acquired helps determine the ensuing pathology.

23263556|a|Interleukin 7 (IL-7) has a critical role in the development of early CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative (DN) thymocytes. Although the transcription factor STAT5 is an important component of IL-7 signaling, differences in the phenotypes of mice deficient in STAT5, IL-7, IL-7 receptor alpha (IL-7rα) or the kinase Jak3 suggest the existence of STAT5-independent IL-7 signaling. Here we found that IL-7-Jak3 signals activated the transcription factor NFATc1 in DN thymocytes by phosphorylating Tyr371 in the regulatory region of NFATc1. This NFAT-activation pathway was critical for the survival and development of DN thymocytes, as deficiency in NFATc1 blocked thymocyte development at the DN1 stage, leading to T cell lymphopenia. In addition, our results demonstrated a cooperative function for NFATc1 and STAT5 in guiding thymocyte development in response to IL-7 signals.

23241949|a|The pericentriolar stacks of Golgi cisternae are separated from each other in G2 and fragmented extensively during mitosis. MEK1 is required for Golgi fragmentation in G2 and for the entry of cells into mitosis. We now report that Myt1 mediates MEK1's effects on the Golgi complex. Knockdown of Myt1 by siRNA increased the efficiency of Golgi complex fragmentation by mitotic cytosol in permeabilized and intact HeLa cells. Myt1 knockdown eliminated the requirement of MEK1 in Golgi fragmentation and alleviated the delay in mitotic entry due to MEK1 inhibition. The phosphorylation of Myt1 by MEK1 requires another kinase but is independent of RSK, Plk, and CDK1. Altogether our findings reveal that Myt1 is inactivated by MEK1 mediated phosphorylation to fragment the Golgi complex in G2 and for the entry of cells into mitosis. It is known that Myt1 inactivation is required for CDK1 activation. Myt1 therefore is an important link by which MEK1 dependent fragmentation of the Golgi complex in G2 is connected to the CDK1 mediated breakdown of Golgi into tubules and vesicles in mitosis.

23354166|a|During interphase in Drosophila neuroblasts, the Centrobin (CNB)-positive daughter centriole retains pericentriolar material (PCM) and organizes an aster that is a key determinant of the orientation of cell division. Here we show that daughter centrioles depleted of CNB cannot fulfil this function whereas mother centrioles that carry ectopic CNB can. CNB co-precipitates with a set of centrosomal proteins that include γ-TUB, ANA2, CNN, SAS-4, ASL, DGRIP71, POLO and SAS-6. Following chemical inhibition of POLO or removal of three POLO phosphorylation sites present in CNB, the interphase microtubule aster is lost. These results demonstrate that centriolar CNB localization is both necessary and sufficient to enable centrioles to retain PCM and organize the interphase aster in Drosophila neuroblasts. They also reveal an interphase function for POLO in this process that seems to have co-opted part of the protein network involved in mitotic centrosome maturation.

23219879|a|JMJD2 lysine demethylases (KDMs) participate in diverse genomic processes. Most JMJD2 homologs display dual selectivity toward H3K9me3 and H3K36me3, with the exception of JMJD2D, which is specific for H3K9me3. Here, we report the crystal structures of the JMJD2D⋅2-oxoglutarate⋅H3K9me3 ternary complex and JMJD2D apoenzyme. Utilizing structural alignments with JMJD2A, molecular docking, and kinetic analysis with an array of histone peptide substrates, we elucidate the specific signatures that permit efficient recognition of H3K9me3 by JMJD2A and JMJD2D, and the residues in JMJD2D that occlude H3K36me3 demethylation. Surprisingly, these results reveal that JMJD2A and JMJD2D exhibit subtle yet important differences in H3K9me3 recognition, despite the overall similarity in the substrate-binding conformation. Further, we show that H3T11 phosphorylation abrogates demethylation by JMJD2 KDMs. Together, these studies reveal the molecular basis for JMJD2 site specificity and provide a framework for structure-based design of selective inhibitors of JMJD2 KDMs implicated in disease.

20308328|a|LEOPARD syndrome (LS), a disorder with multiple developmental abnormalities, is mainly due to mutations that impair the activity of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 (PTPN11). How these alterations cause the disease remains unknown. We report here that fibroblasts isolated from LS patients displayed stronger epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced phosphorylation of both AKT and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) than fibroblasts from control patients. Similar results were obtained in HEK293 cells expressing LS mutants of SHP2. We found that the GAB1/phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) complex was more abundant in fibroblasts from LS than control subjects and that both AKT and GSK-3beta hyperphosphorylation were prevented by reducing GAB1 expression or by overexpressing a GAB1 mutant unable to bind to PI3K. Consistently, purified recombinant LS mutants failed to dephosphorylate GAB1 PI3K-binding sites. These mutants induced PI3K-dependent increase in cell size in a model of chicken embryo cardiac explants and in transcriptional activity of the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene in neonate rat cardiomyocytes. In conclusion, SHP2 mutations causing LS facilitate EGF-induced PI3K/AKT/GSK-3beta stimulation through impaired GAB1 dephosphorylation, resulting in deregulation of a novel signaling pathway that could be involved in LS pathology.

23371553|a|Receptor-interacting protein kinase 4 (RIPK4) is required for epidermal differentiation and is mutated in Bartsocas-Papas syndrome. RIPK4 binds to protein kinase C, but its signaling mechanisms are largely unknown. Ectopic RIPK4, but not catalytically inactive or Bartsocas-Papas RIPK4 mutants, induced accumulation of cytosolic β-catenin and a transcriptional program similar to that caused by Wnt3a. In Xenopus embryos, Ripk4 synergized with coexpressed Xwnt8, whereas Ripk4 morpholinos or catalytic inactive Ripk4 antagonized Wnt signaling. RIPK4 interacted constitutively with the adaptor protein DVL2 and, after Wnt3a stimulation, with the co-receptor LRP6. Phosphorylation of DVL2 by RIPK4 favored canonical Wnt signaling. Wnt-dependent growth of xenografted human tumor cells was suppressed by RIPK4 knockdown, suggesting that RIPK4 overexpression may contribute to the growth of certain tumor types.

23273428|a|The oncogenicity of the L858R mutant form of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in non-small-cell lung cancer is thought to be due to the constitutive activation of its kinase domain. The selectivity of the marketed drugs gefitinib and erlotinib for L858R mutant is attributed to their specific recognition of the active kinase and to weaker ATP binding by L858R EGFR. We present crystal structures showing that neither L858R nor the drug-resistant L858R+T790M EGFR kinase domain is in the constitutively active conformation. Additional co-crystal structures show that gefitinib and dacomitinib, an irreversible anilinoquinazoline derivative currently in clinical development, may not be conformation specific for the active state of the enzyme. Structural data further reveal the potential mode of recognition of one of the autophosphorylation sites in the C-terminal tail, Tyr-1016, by the kinase domain. Biochemical and biophysical evidence suggest that the oncogenic mutations impact the conformational dynamics of the enzyme.

23386615|a|The serine/threonine protein kinases Mst1 and Mst2 can be activated by cellular stressors including hydrogen peroxide. Using two independent protein interaction screens, we show that these kinases associate, in an oxidation-dependent manner, with Prdx1, an enzyme that regulates the cellular redox state by reducing hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen. Mst1 inactivates Prdx1 by phosphorylating it at Thr-90 and Thr-183, leading to accumulation of hydrogen peroxide in cells. These results suggest that hydrogen peroxide-stimulated Mst1 activates a positive feedback loop to sustain an oxidizing cellular state.

23352416|a|The natural product englerin A (EA) binds to and activates protein kinase C-θ (PKCθ). EA-dependent activation of PKCθ induces an insulin-resistant phenotype, limiting the access of tumor cells to glucose. At the same time, EA causes PKCθ-mediated phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factor heat shock factor 1, an inducer of glucose dependence. By promoting glucose addiction, while simultaneously starving cells of glucose, EA proves to be synthetically lethal to highly glycolytic tumors.

23105117|a|Human VRK2 (vaccinia-related kinase 2), a kinase that emerged late in evolution, affects different signaling pathways, and some carcinomas express high levels of VRK2. Invasion by cancer cells has been associated with NFAT1 (nuclear factor of activated T cells) activation and expression of the COX-2 (cyclooxygenase 2) gene. We hypothesized that VRK proteins might play a regulatory role in NFAT1 activation in tumor cells. We demonstrate that VRK2 directly interacts and phosphorylates NFAT1 in Ser-32 within its N-terminal transactivation domain. VRK2 increases NFAT1-dependent transcription by phosphorylation, and this effect is only detected following cell phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and ionomycin stimulation and calcineurin activation. This NFAT1 hyperactivation by VRK2 increases COX-2 gene expression through the proximal NFAT1 binding site in the COX-2 gene promoter. Furthermore, VRK2A down-regulation by RNA interference reduces COX-2 expression at transcriptional and protein levels. Therefore, VRK2 down-regulation reduces cell invasion by tumor cells, such as MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435, upon stimulation with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate plus ionomycin. These findings identify the first reported target and function of human VRK2 as an active kinase playing a role in regulation of cancer cell invasion through the NFAT pathway and COX-2 expression.

23241745|a|Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Although biochemical studies have shown that certain PD mutations confer elevated kinase activity in vitro on LRRK2, there are no methods available to directly monitor LRRK2 kinase activity in vivo. We demonstrate that LRRK2 autophosphorylation on Ser(1292) occurs in vivo and is enhanced by several familial PD mutations including N1437H, R1441G/C, G2019S, and I2020T. Combining two PD mutations together further increases Ser(1292) autophosphorylation. Mutation of Ser(1292) to alanine (S1292A) ameliorates the effects of LRRK2 PD mutations on neurite outgrowth in cultured rat embryonic primary neurons. Using cell-based and pharmacodynamic assays with phosphorylated Ser(1292) as the readout, we developed a brain-penetrating LRRK2 kinase inhibitor that blocks Ser(1292) autophosphorylation in vivo and attenuates the cellular consequences of LRRK2 PD mutations in vitro. These data suggest that Ser(1292) autophosphorylation may be a useful indicator of LRRK2 kinase activity in vivo and may contribute to the cellular effects of certain PD mutations.

23241358|a|Mutations in the LRRK2 gene cause autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 encodes a multi-domain protein containing a Ras-of-complex (Roc) GTPase domain, a C-terminal of Roc domain and a protein kinase domain. LRRK2 can function as a GTPase and protein kinase, although the interplay between these two enzymatic domains is poorly understood. Although guanine nucleotide binding is critically required for the kinase activity of LRRK2, the contribution of GTP hydrolysis is not known. In general, the molecular determinants regulating GTPase activity and how the GTPase domain contributes to the properties of LRRK2 remain to be clarified. Here, we identify a number of synthetic missense mutations in the GTPase domain that functionally modulate GTP binding and GTP hydrolysis and we employ these mutants to comprehensively explore the contribution of GTPase activity to the kinase activity and cellular phenotypes of LRRK2. Our data demonstrate that guanine nucleotide binding and, to a lesser extent, GTP hydrolysis are required for maintaining normal kinase activity and both activities contribute to the GTP-dependent activation of LRRK2 kinase activity. Guanine nucleotide binding but not GTP hydrolysis regulates the dimerization, structure and stability of LRRK2. Furthermore, GTP hydrolysis regulates the LRRK2-dependent inhibition of neurite outgrowth in primary cortical neurons but is unable to robustly modulate the effects of the familial G2019S mutation. Our study elucidates the role of GTPase activity in regulating kinase activity and cellular phenotypes of LRRK2 and has important implications for the validation of the GTPase domain as a molecular target for attenuating LRRK2-mediated neurodegeneration.

20348415|a|Aneuploidy is a characteristic feature of established cancers and can promote tumor development. Aneuploidy may arise directly, through unequal distribution of chromosomes into daughter cells, or indirectly, through a tetraploid intermediate. The polo family kinase Plk4/Sak is required for late mitotic progression and is haploinsufficient for tumor suppression in mice. Here we show that loss of heterozygosity (LOH) occurs at the Plk4 locus in 50% of human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and is present even in preneoplastic cirrhotic liver nodules. LOH at Plk4 is associated with reduced Plk4 expression in HCC tumors but not with mutations in the remaining allele. Plk4(+/-) murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) at early passage show a high incidence of multinucleation, supernumerary centrosomes, and a near-tetraploid karyotype. Underlying these phenotypes is a high rate of primary cytokinesis failure, associated with aberrant actomyosin ring formation, reduced RhoA activation, and failure to localize the RhoA guanine nucleotide exchange factor Ect2 to the spindle midbody. We further show that Plk4 normally localizes to the midbody and binds to and phosphorylates Ect2 in vitro. With serial passaging Plk4(+/-) MEFs rapidly immortalize, acquiring an increasing burden of nonclonal and clonal gross chromosomal irregularities, and form tumors in vivo. Our results indicate that haploid levels of Plk4 disrupt RhoGTPase function during cytokinesis, resulting in aneuploidy and tumorigenesis, thus implicating early LOH at Plk4 as one of the drivers of human hepatocellular carcinogenesis. These findings represent an advance in our understanding of genetic predisposition to HCC, which continues to increase in incidence globally and particularly in North America.

23396208|a|Regulatory T (Treg) cells suppress autoimmune disease, and impaired Treg cell function is associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Here we demonstrate that forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) transcriptional activity and, consequently, Treg cell suppressive function are regulated by phosphorylation at Ser418 in the C-terminal DNA-binding domain. In rheumatoid arthritis-derived Treg cells, the Ser418 site was specifically dephosphorylated by protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), whose expression and enzymatic activity were induced in the inflamed synovium by tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), leading to impaired Treg cell function. Moreover, TNF-α-induced Treg cell dysfunction correlated with increased numbers of interleukin-17 (IL-17)(+) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ)(+)CD4(+) T cells within the inflamed synovium in rheumatoid arthritis. Treatment with a TNF-α-specific antibody restored Treg cell function in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis, which was associated with decreased PP1 expression and increased FOXP3 phosphorylation in Treg cells. Thus, TNF-α controls the balance between Treg cells and pathogenic TH17 and TH1 cells in the synovium of individuals with rheumatoid arthritis through FOXP3 dephosphorylation.

23560844|a|Protein phosphorylation is an important post-translational modification that regulates almost every aspect of signal transduction in cells. Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family kinase extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) is a point of convergence for many cellular activities in response to external stimulation. With stimuli, ERK activity is significantly increased by the phosphorylation of Thr202 and Tyr204 at its activation loop. Downregulation of ERK phosphorylation at these two sites by several phosphatases, such as protein phosphatase 2A, HePTP and MAPK phosphatase 3, is essential for maintaining appropriate ERK function in different cellular processes. However, it is unknown whether metal-dependent protein phosphatase (PPM) family phosphatases directly dephosphorylate ERK. In this study, we found that PPM1A negatively regulated ERK by directly dephosphorylating its pThr202 position early in EGF stimulation. Additional kinetic studies revealed that key residues participated in phospho-ERK recognition by PPM1A. Importantly, PPM1A preferred the phospho-ERK peptide sequence over a panel of other phosphopeptides through the interactions of basic residues in the active site of PPM1A with the pThr-Glu-pTyr motif of ERK. Whereas Lys165 and Arg33 were required for efficient catalysis or phosphosubstrate binding of PPM1A, Gln185 and Arg186 were determinants of PPM1A substrate specificity. The interaction between Arg186 of PPM1A and Glu203 and pTyr204 of phospho-ERK was identified as a hot-spot for phospho-ERK-PPM1A interaction.

20228790|a|Demethylation at distinct lysine residues in histone H3 by lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) causes either gene repression or activation. As a component of co-repressor complexes, LSD1 contributes to target gene repression by removing mono- and dimethyl marks from lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4). In contrast, during androgen receptor (AR)-activated gene expression, LSD1 removes mono- and dimethyl marks from lysine 9 of histone H3 (H3K9). Yet, the mechanisms that control this dual specificity of demethylation are unknown. Here we show that phosphorylation of histone H3 at threonine 6 (H3T6) by protein kinase C beta I (PKCbeta(I), also known as PRKCbeta) is the key event that prevents LSD1 from demethylating H3K4 during AR-dependent gene activation. In vitro, histone H3 peptides methylated at lysine 4 and phosphorylated at threonine 6 are no longer LSD1 substrates. In vivo, PKCbeta(I) co-localizes with AR and LSD1 on target gene promoters and phosphorylates H3T6 after androgen-induced gene expression. RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of PKCbeta(I) abrogates H3T6 phosphorylation, enhances demethylation at H3K4, and inhibits AR-dependent transcription. Activation of PKCbeta(I) requires androgen-dependent recruitment of the gatekeeper kinase protein kinase C (PKC)-related kinase 1 (PRK1). Notably, increased levels of PKCbeta(I) and phosphorylated H3T6 (H3T6ph) positively correlate with high Gleason scores of prostate carcinomas, and inhibition of PKCbeta(I) blocks AR-induced tumour cell proliferation in vitro and cancer progression of tumour xenografts in vivo. Together, our data establish that androgen-dependent kinase signalling leads to the writing of the new chromatin mark H3T6ph, which in consequence prevents removal of active methyl marks from H3K4 during AR-stimulated gene expression.

23695357|a|The BAR (Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs) domain proteins arfaptin1 and arfaptin2 are localized to the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and, by virtue of their ability to sense and/or generate membrane curvature, could play an important role in the biogenesis of transport carriers. We report that arfaptins contain an amphipathic helix (AH) preceding the BAR domain, which is essential for their binding to phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI(4)P)-containing liposomes and the TGN of mammalian cells. The binding of arfaptin1, but not arfaptin2, to PI(4)P is regulated by protein kinase D (PKD) mediated phosphorylation at Ser100 within the AH. We also found that only arfaptin1 is required for the PKD-dependent trafficking of chromogranin A by the regulated secretory pathway. Altogether, these findings reveal the importance of PI(4)P and PKD in the recruitment of arfaptins at the TGN and their requirement in the events leading to the biogenesis of secretory storage granules.

23746807|a|Tank-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is a serine/threonine protein-kinase mediating innate antimicrobial immunity. TBK1 is involved in the signaling of TLRs, RLRs, and STING-mediated sensing of cytosolic DNA. Stimulation of these receptors results in the activation of TBK1, which phosphorylates interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3. Phosphorylated IRF-3 translocates into the nucleus to initiate the transcription of the interferon (IFN)-β gene. Here, we show that TBK1 is activated by autophosphorylation at residue Ser172. Structures of TBK1 bound to two inhibitors showed that TBK1 has the IκB kinase fold with three distinct domains: the kinase domain, the ubiquitin-like domain, and the scaffold and dimerization domain. However, the overall structures of the TBK1 monomer and its dimer are different from IKKβ in the arrangements of the three domains and in dimer formation. Phosphorylation of IRF-3 by TBK1 in vitro results in its oligomerization, and phosphorylation of residue Ser386 plays a key role in IRF-3 activation. 

23526884|a|The dual specificity protein/lipid kinase, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), promotes growth factor-mediated cell survival and is frequently deregulated in cancer. However, in contrast to canonical lipid-kinase functions, the role of PI3K protein kinase activity in regulating cell survival is unknown. We have employed a novel approach to purify and pharmacologically profile protein kinases from primary human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells that phosphorylate serine residues in the cytoplasmic portion of cytokine receptors to promote hemopoietic cell survival. We have isolated a kinase activity that is able to directly phosphorylate Ser585 in the cytoplasmic domain of the interleukin 3 (IL-3) and granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) receptors and shown it to be PI3K. Physiological concentrations of cytokine in the picomolar range were sufficient for activating the protein kinase activity of PI3K leading to Ser585 phosphorylation and hemopoietic cell survival but did not activate PI3K lipid kinase signaling or promote proliferation. Blockade of PI3K lipid signaling by expression of the pleckstrin homology of Akt1 had no significant impact on the ability of picomolar concentrations of cytokine to promote hemopoietic cell survival. Furthermore, inducible expression of a mutant form of PI3K that is defective in lipid kinase activity but retains protein kinase activity was able to promote Ser585 phosphorylation and hemopoietic cell survival in the absence of cytokine. Blockade of p110α by RNA interference or multiple independent PI3K inhibitors not only blocked Ser585 phosphorylation in cytokine-dependent cells and primary human AML blasts, but also resulted in a block in survival signaling and cell death. Our findings demonstrate a new role for the protein kinase activity of PI3K in phosphorylating the cytoplasmic tail of the GM-CSF and IL-3 receptors to selectively regulate cell survival highlighting the importance of targeting such pathways in cancer.

23644467|a|Increased stromal collagen deposition in human breast tumours correlates with metastases. We show that activation of the collagen I receptor DDR2 (discoidin domain receptor 2) regulates SNAIL1 stability by stimulating ERK2 activity, in a Src-dependent manner. Activated ERK2 directly phosphorylates SNAIL1, leading to SNAIL1 nuclear accumulation, reduced ubiquitylation and increased protein half-life. DDR2-mediated stabilization of SNAIL1 promotes breast cancer cell invasion and migration in vitro, and metastasis in vivo. DDR2 expression was observed in most human invasive ductal breast carcinomas studied, and was associated with nuclear SNAIL1 and absence of E-cadherin expression. We propose that DDR2 maintains SNAIL1 level and activity in tumour cells that have undergone epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thereby facilitating continued tumour cell invasion through collagen-I-rich extracellular matrices by sustaining the EMT phenotype. As such, DDR2 could be an RTK (receptor tyrosine kinase) target for the treatment of breast cancer metastasis.

23636329|a|MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are generated by two-step processing to yield small RNAs that negatively regulate target gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. Deregulation of miRNAs has been linked to diverse pathological processes, including cancer. Recent studies have also implicated miRNAs in the regulation of cellular response to a spectrum of stresses, such as hypoxia, which is frequently encountered in the poorly angiogenic core of a solid tumour. However, the upstream regulators of miRNA biogenesis machineries remain obscure, raising the question of how tumour cells efficiently coordinate and impose specificity on miRNA expression and function in response to stresses. Here we show that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which is the product of a well-characterized oncogene in human cancers, suppresses the maturation of specific tumour-suppressor-like miRNAs in response to hypoxic stress through phosphorylation of argonaute 2 (AGO2) at Tyr 393. The association between EGFR and AGO2 is enhanced by hypoxia, leading to elevated AGO2-Y393 phosphorylation, which in turn reduces the binding of Dicer to AGO2 and inhibits miRNA processing from precursor miRNAs to mature miRNAs. We also identify a long-loop structure in precursor miRNAs as a critical regulatory element in phospho-Y393-AGO2-mediated miRNA maturation. Furthermore, AGO2-Y393 phosphorylation mediates EGFR-enhanced cell survival and invasiveness under hypoxia, and correlates with poorer overall survival in breast cancer patients. Our study reveals a previously unrecognized function of EGFR in miRNA maturation and demonstrates how EGFR is likely to function as a regulator of AGO2 through novel post-translational modification. These findings suggest that modulation of miRNA biogenesis is important for stress response in tumour cells and has potential clinical implications.

23665168|a|Dual-specificity tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation-regulated kinases (DYRKs) play key roles in brain development, regulation of splicing, and apoptosis, and are potential drug targets for neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. We present crystal structures of one representative member of each DYRK subfamily: DYRK1A with an ATP-mimetic inhibitor and consensus peptide, and DYRK2 including NAPA and DH (DYRK homology) box regions. The current activation model suggests that DYRKs are Ser/Thr kinases that only autophosphorylate the second tyrosine of the activation loop YxY motif during protein translation. The structures explain the roles of this tyrosine and of the DH box in DYRK activation and provide a structural model for DYRK substrate recognition. Phosphorylation of a library of naturally occurring peptides identified substrate motifs that lack proline in the P+1 position, suggesting that DYRK1A is not a strictly proline-directed kinase. Our data also show that DYRK1A wild-type and Y321F mutant retain tyrosine autophosphorylation activity.

23623661|a|Nearly 90% of human melanomas contain inactivated wild-type p53, the underlying mechanisms for which are not fully understood. Here, we identify that cyclin B1/CDK1-phosphorylates iASPP, which leads to the inhibition of iASPP dimerization, promotion of iASPP monomer nuclear entry, and exposure of its p53 binding sites, leading to increased p53 inhibition. Nuclear iASPP is enriched in melanoma metastasis and associates with poor patient survival. Most wild-type p53-expressing melanoma cell lines coexpress high levels of phosphorylated nuclear iASPP, MDM2, and cyclin B1. Inhibition of MDM2 and iASPP phosphorylation with small molecules induced p53-dependent apoptosis and growth suppression. Concurrent p53 reactivation and BRAFV600E inhibition achieved additive suppression in vivo, presenting an alternative for melanoma therapy.

23643389|a|PIK3CA, which encodes the p110α catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase α, is frequently mutated in human cancers. Most of these mutations occur at two hot-spots: E545K and H1047R located in the helical domain and the kinase domain, respectively. Here, we report that p110α E545K, but not p110α H1047R, gains the ability to associate with IRS1 independent of the p85 regulatory subunit, thereby rewiring this oncogenic signaling pathway. Disruption of the IRS1-p110α E545K interaction destabilizes the p110α protein, reduces AKT phosphorylation, and slows xenograft tumor growth of a cancer cell line expressing p110α E545K. Moreover, a hydrocarbon-stapled peptide that disrupts this interaction inhibits the growth of tumors expressing p110α E545K.

23602409|a|IκB kinase α (IKKα) activity is required for ErbB2-induced mammary tumorigenesis. Here, we show that IKKα and its activator, NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK), support the expansion of tumor-initiating cells (TICs) that copurify with a CD24(med)CD49f(hi) population from premalignant ErbB2-expressing mammary glands. Upon activation, IKKα enters the nucleus, phosphorylates the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p27/Kip1, and stimulates its nuclear export or exclusion. Reduced p27 expression rescues mammary tumorigenesis in mice deficient in IKKα kinase activity and restores TIC self-renewal. IKKα is also likely to be involved in human breast cancer, where its expression shows an inverse correlation with metastasis-free survival, and its presence in the nucleus of invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs) is associated with decreased nuclear p27 abundance.

23680147|a|The human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) family of tyrosine kinases is deregulated in multiple cancers either through amplification, overexpression, or mutation. ERBB3/HER3, the only member with an impaired kinase domain, although amplified or overexpressed in some cancers, has not been reported to carry oncogenic mutations. Here, we report the identification of ERBB3 somatic mutations in ~11% of colon and gastric cancers. We found that the ERBB3 mutants transformed colonic and breast epithelial cells in a ligand-independent manner. However, the mutant ERBB3 oncogenic activity was dependent on kinase-active ERBB2. Furthermore, we found that anti-ERBB antibodies and small molecule inhibitors effectively blocked mutant ERBB3-mediated oncogenic signaling and disease progression in vivo.

23602568|a|Cellular information processing via reversible protein phosphorylation requires tight control of the localization, activity, and substrate specificity of protein kinases, which to a large extent is accomplished by complex formation with other proteins. Despite their critical role in cellular regulation and pathogenesis, protein interaction information is available for only a subset of the 518 human protein kinases. Here we present a global proteomic analysis of complexes of the human CMGC kinase group. In addition to subgroup-specific functional enrichment and modularity, the identified 652 high-confidence kinase-protein interactions provide a specific biochemical context for many poorly studied CMGC kinases. Furthermore, the analysis revealed a kinase-kinase subnetwork and candidate substrates for CMGC kinases. Finally, the presented interaction proteome uncovered a large set of interactions with proteins genetically linked to a range of human diseases, including cancer, suggesting additional routes for analyzing the role of CMGC kinases in controlling human disease pathways.

20351292|a|Hypertonicity activates the transcription factor TonEBP/OREBP, resulting in increased expression of osmoprotective genes, including those responsible for accumulation of organic osmolytes and heat-shock proteins. Phosphorylation of TonEBP/OREBP contributes to its activation. Several of the kinases that are involved were previously identified, but the phosphatases were not. In the present studies we screened a genomewide human phosphatase siRNA library in human embryonic kidney (HEK)293 cells for effects on TonEBP/OREBP transcriptional activity. We found that siRNAs against 57 phosphatases significantly alter TonEBP/OREBP transcriptional activity during normotonicity (290 mosmol/kg) or hypertonicity (500 mosmol/kg, NaCl added) or both. Most siRNAs increase TonEBP/OREBP activity, implying that the targeted phosphatases normally reduce that activity. We further studied in detail SHP-1, whose knockdown by its specific siRNA increases TonEBP/OREBP transcriptional activity at 500 mosmol/kg. We confirmed that SHP-1 is inhibitory by overexpressing it, which reduces TonEBP/OREBP transcriptional activity at 500 mosmol/kg. SHP-1 dephosphorylates TonEBP/OREBP at a known regulatory site, Y143, both in vivo and in vitro. It inhibits TonEBP/OREBP by both reducing TonEBP/OREBP nuclear localization, which is Y143 dependent, and by lowering high NaCl-induced TonEBP/OREBP transactivating activity. SHP-1 coimmunoprecipitates with TonEBP/OREBP and vice versa, suggesting that they are physically associated in the cell. High NaCl inhibits the effect of SHP-1 on TonEBP/OREBP by increasing phosphorylation of SHP-1 on Ser591, which reduces its phosphatase activity and localization to the nucleus. Thus, TonEBP/OREBP is extensively regulated by phosphatases, including SHP-1, whose inhibition by high NaCl increases phosphorylation of TonEBP/OREBP at Y143, contributing to the nuclear localization and activation of TonEBP/OREBP.

20305656|a|The serine/threonine protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) dephosphorylates hundreds of key biological targets. PP1 associates with >or=200 regulatory proteins to form highly specific holoenzymes. These regulatory proteins target PP1 to its point of action within the cell and prime its enzymatic specificity for particular substrates. However, how they direct PP1's specificity is not understood. Here we show that spinophilin, a neuronal PP1 regulator, is entirely unstructured in its unbound form, and it binds PP1 through a folding-upon-binding mechanism in an elongated fashion, blocking one of PP1's three putative substrate binding sites without altering its active site. This mode of binding is sufficient for spinophilin to restrict PP1's activity toward a model substrate in vitro without affecting its ability to dephosphorylate its neuronal substrate, glutamate receptor 1 (GluR1). Thus, our work provides the molecular basis for the ability of spinophilin to dictate PP1 substrate specificity.

25822914|a|Sepsis, a hyperinflammatory response that can result in multiple organ dysfunctions, is a leading cause of mortality from infection. Here, we show that orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 (also known as TR3) can enhance resistance to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced sepsis in mice by inhibiting NF-κB activity and suppressing aberrant cytokine production. Nur77 directly associates with p65 to block its binding to the κB element. However, this function of Nur77 is countered by the LPS-activated p38α phosphorylation of Nur77. Dampening the interaction between Nur77 and p38α would favor Nur77 suppression of the hyperinflammatory response. A compound, n-pentyl 2-[3,5-dihydroxy-2-(1-nonanoyl) phenyl]acetate, screened from a Nur77-biased library, blocked the Nur77-p38α interaction by targeting the ligand-binding domain of Nur77 and restored the suppression of the hyperinflammatory response through Nur77 inhibition of NF-κB. This study associates the nuclear receptor with immune homeostasis and implicates a new therapeutic strategy to treat hyperinflammatory responses by targeting a p38α substrate to modulate p38α-regulated functions. 

25860027|a|The primary cilium, which disassembles before mitotic entry and reassembles after mitosis, organizes many signal transduction pathways that are crucial for cell life and individual development. However, how ciliogenesis is regulated during the cell cycle remains largely unknown. Here we show that GSK3β, Dzip1, and Rab8 co-regulate ciliogenesis by promoting the assembly of the ciliary membrane after mitosis. Immunofluorescence and super-resolution microscopy showed that Dzip1 was localized to the periciliary diffusion barrier and enriched at the mother centriole. Knockdown of Dzip1 by short hairpin RNAs led to failed ciliary localization of Rab8, and Rab8 accumulation at the basal body. Dzip1 preferentially bound to Rab8GDP and promoted its dissociation from its inhibitor GDI2 at the pericentriolar region, as demonstrated by sucrose gradient centrifugation of purified basal bodies, immunoprecipitation, and acceptor-bleaching fluorescence resonance energy transfer assays. By means of in vitro phosphorylation, in vivo gel shift, phospho-peptide identification by mass spectrometry, and GST pulldown assays, we demonstrated that Dzip1 was phosphorylated by GSK3β at S520 in G0 phase, which increased its binding to GDI2 to promote the release of Rab8GDP at the cilium base. Moreover, ciliogenesis was inhibited by overexpression of the GSK3β-nonphosphorylatable Dzip1 mutant or by disabling of GSK3β by specific inhibitors or knockout of GSK3β in cells. Collectively, our data reveal a unique cascade consisting of GSK3β, Dzip1, and Rab8 that regulates ciliogenesis after mitosis. 

22609948|a|Non-motile primary cilium is an antenna-like structure whose defect is associated with a wide range of pathologies, including developmental disorders and cancer. Although mechanisms regulating cilia assembly have been extensively studied, how cilia disassembly is regulated remains poorly understood. Here, we report unexpected roles of Dishevelled 2 (Dvl2) and interphase polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) in primary cilia disassembly. We demonstrated that Dvl2 is phosphorylated at S143 and T224 in a manner that requires both non-canonical Wnt5a ligand and casein kinase 1 epsilon (CK1ɛ), and that this event is critical to interact with Plk1 in early stages of the cell cycle. The resulting Dvl2-Plk1 complex mediated Wnt5a-CK1ɛ-Dvl2-dependent primary cilia disassembly by stabilizing the HEF1 scaffold and activating its associated Aurora-A (AurA), a kinase crucially required for primary cilia disassembly. Thus, via the formation of the Dvl2-Plk1 complex, Plk1 plays an unanticipated role in primary cilia disassembly by linking Wnt5a-induced biochemical steps to HEF1/AurA-dependent cilia disassembly. This study may provide new insights into the mechanism underlying ciliary disassembly processes and various cilia-related disorders.

22505024|a|The tumour suppressor gene product Mig-6 acts as an inhibitor of epidermal growth factor (EGF) signalling. However, its posttranslational modifications and regulatory mechanisms have not been elucidated. Here, we investigated the phosphorylation of human Mig-6 and found that Chk1 phosphorylated Mig-6 in vivo as well as in vitro. Moreover, EGF stimulation promoted phosphorylation of Mig-6 without DNA damage and the phosphorylation was inhibited by depletion of Chk1. EGF also increased Ser280-phosphorylated Chk1, a cytoplasmic-tethering form, via PI3K pathway. Mass spectrometric analyses suggested that Ser 251 of Mig-6 was a major phosphorylation site by Chk1 in vitro and in vivo. Substitution of Ser 251 to alanine increased inhibitory activity of Mig-6 against EGF receptor (EGFR) activation. Moreover, EGF-dependent activation of EGFR and cell growth were inhibited by Chk1 depletion, and were rescued by co-depletion of Mig-6. Our results suggest that Chk1 phosphorylates Mig-6 on Ser 251, resulting in the inhibition of Mig-6, and that Chk1 acts as a positive regulator of EGF signalling. This is a novel function of Chk1.

22510990|a|Although Niban is highly expressed in human cancer cells, the cellular functions of Niban remain largely unknown. We demonstrate here that ultraviolet irradiation induces phosphorylation of Niban at S602 by AKT, which increases the association of Niban with nucleophosmin and disassociation of nucleophosmin from the MDM2 complex. This leads to the promotion of MDM2-p53 interaction and subsequent p53 degradation, thereby providing an antiapoptotic effect. Conversely, depletion of or deficiency in Niban expression promotes stabilization of p53 with increased cell apoptosis. Our findings illustrate a pivotal role for AKT-mediated phosphorylation of Niban in protecting cells from genotoxic stress-induced cell apoptosis.

22575646|a|ΔNp63α is a p63 isoform that is predominantly expressed in the epidermal stem cells and in cancer. To find the regulatory pathways of ΔNp63α, we assessed whether ΔNp63α is acetylated and determined the functional implications of acetylation. First, the hinge region of p63 was shown to be acetylated by PCAF, similarly to other p53 family members. Second, acetylation synergistically induced cytoplasmic localization of ΔNp63α. Finally, acetyl-ΔNp63α was induced during high-density culture, suggesting that acetylation of ΔNp63α may reinforce cell cycle arrest upon cell contact. Altogether, these findings suggest that acetylation of ΔNp63α contributes to the epidermal homeostasis.

22615379|a|Histone acetyltransferase 1 is the founding member of the histone acetyltransferase superfamily and catalyzes lysine acetylation of newly synthesized histone H4. Here we report a 1.9-Å resolution crystal structure of human histone acetyltransferase 1 in complex with acetyl coenzyme A and histone H4 peptide. The crystal structure reveals that the cofactor and the side chain of lysine 12 of histone H4 peptide are placed in the canyon between the central and C-terminal domains. Histone H4 peptide adopts a well-defined conformation and establishes an extensive set of interactions with the enzyme including invariant residues Glu64 and Trp199, which together govern substrate-binding specificity of histone acetyltransferase 1. Our structure-guided enzyme kinetic study further demonstrates a cumulative effect of the active-site residues Glu187, Glu276, and Asp277 on deprotonation of the ε-amino group of reactive Lys12 for direct attack of the acetyl group of the cofactor.

22579248|a|Protein kinase C (PKC) play critical roles in many cellular functions including differentiation, proliferation, growth, and survival. However, the molecular bases governing PKC's substrate recognitions remain poorly understood. Here we determined the structure of PKCι in complex with a peptide from Par-3 at 2.4 Å. PKCι in the complex adopts catalytically competent, closed conformation without phosphorylation of Thr402 in the activation loop. The Par-3 peptide binds to an elongated groove formed by the N- and C-lobes of the kinase domain. The PKCι/Par-3 complex structure, together with extensive biochemical studies, reveals a set of substrate recognition sites common to all PKC isozymes as well as a hydrophobic pocket unique to aPKC. A consensus aPKC's substrate recognition sequence pattern can be readily identified based on the complex structure. Finally, we demonstrate that the pseudosubstrate sequence of PKCι resembles its substrate sequence, directly binds to and inhibits the activity of the kinase.

22514276|a|The cardiac Na(+) channel Na(V)1.5 current (I(Na)) is critical to cardiac excitability, and altered I(Na) gating has been implicated in genetic and acquired arrhythmias. Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is up-regulated in heart failure and has been shown to cause I(Na) gating changes that mimic those induced by a point mutation in humans that is associated with combined long QT and Brugada syndromes. We sought to identify the site(s) on Na(V)1.5 that mediate(s) the CaMKII-induced alterations in I(Na) gating. We analyzed both CaMKII binding and CaMKII-dependent phosphorylation of the intracellularly accessible regions of Na(V)1.5 using a series of GST fusion constructs, immobilized peptide arrays, and soluble peptides. A stable interaction between δ(C)-CaMKII and the intracellular loop between domains 1 and 2 of Na(V)1.5 was observed. This region was also phosphorylated by δ(C)-CaMKII, specifically at the Ser-516 and Thr-594 sites. Wild-type (WT) and phosphomutant hNa(V)1.5 were co-expressed with GFP-δ(C)-CaMKII in HEK293 cells, and I(Na) was recorded. As observed in myocytes, CaMKII shifted WT I(Na) availability to a more negative membrane potential and enhanced accumulation of I(Na) into an intermediate inactivated state, but these effects were abolished by mutating either of these sites to non-phosphorylatable Ala residues. Mutation of these sites to phosphomimetic Glu residues negatively shifted I(Na) availability without the need for CaMKII. CaMKII-dependent phosphorylation of Na(V)1.5 at multiple sites (including Thr-594 and Ser-516) appears to be required to evoke loss-of-function changes in gating that could contribute to acquired Brugada syndrome-like effects in heart failure.

20585042|a|T-cell ubiquitin ligand-2 (TULA-2) is a recently discovered histidine tyrosine phosphatase thought to be ubiquitously expressed. In this work, we have investigated whether TULA-2 has a key role in platelet glycoprotein VI (GPVI) signaling. This study indicates that TULA-2 is expressed in human and murine platelets and is able to associate with Syk and dephosphorylate it. Ablation of TULA-2 resulted in hyperphosphorylation of Syk and its downstream effector phospholipase C-γ2 as well as enhanced GPVI-mediated platelet functional responses. In addition, shorter bleeding times and a prothrombotic phenotype were observed in mice lacking TULA-2. We therefore propose that TULA-2 is the primary tyrosine phosphatase mediating the dephosphorylation of Syk and thus functions as a negative regulator of GPVI signaling in platelets.

20531387|a|Control of centrosome duplication is tightly linked with the progression of the cell cycle. Recent studies suggest that the fundamental process of centriole duplication is evolutionally conserved. Here, we identified centrosomal P4.1-associated protein (CPAP), a human homologue of SAS-4, as a substrate of PLK2 whose activity oscillates during the cell cycle. PLK2 phosphorylates the S589 and S595 residues of CPAP in vitro and in vivo. This phosphorylation is critical for procentriole formation during the centrosome cycle. PLK4 also phosphorylates S595 of CPAP, but PLK4 phosphorylation is not a critical step in the PLK4 function in procentriole assembly. CPAP is phosphorylated in a cell cycle stage-specific manner, so that its phosphorylation increases at the G1/S transition phase and decreases during the exit of mitosis. Phosphorylated CPAP is preferentially located at the procentriole. Furthermore, overexpression of a phospho-resistant CPAP mutant resulted in the failure to form elongated centrioles. On the basis of these results, we propose that phosphorylated CPAP is involved in procentriole assembly, possibly for centriole elongation. This work demonstrates an example of how procentriole formation is linked to the progression of the cell cycle.

20395957|a|Cell division cycle 2 (Cdc2) protein is an essential subunit of M-phase kinase (MPK), which has a key role in G2/M transition. Even though the control of MPK activity has been well established with regard to the phosphorylation of Cdc2 at Thr 14 and/or Tyr 15 and Thr 161, little is known about the proteolytic control of Cdc2. In this study, we observed that Cdc2 was downregulated under genotoxic stresses and that double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR) was involved in the process. The PKR-mediated Tyr4 phosphorylation triggered Cdc2 ubiquitination. Phospho-mimic mutations at the Tyr 4 residue (Y4D or Y4E) caused significant ubiquitination of Cdc2 even in the absence of PKR. Our findings demonstrate that (i) PKR, Ser/Thr kinase, phosphorylates its new substrate Cdc2 at the Tyr 4 residue, (ii) PKR-mediated Tyr 4-phosphorylation facilitates Cdc2 ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation, (iii) unphosphorylated Tyr 4 prevents Cdc2 ubiquitination, and (iv) downstream from p53, PKR has a crucial role in G2 arrest and triggers Cdc2 downregulation under genotoxic conditions.

20577264|a|In response to G2 DNA damage, the p53 pathway is activated to lead to cell-cycle arrest, but how p53 is eliminated during the subsequent recovery process is poorly understood. It has been established that Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) controls G2 DNA-damage recovery. However, whether Plk1 activity contributes to p53 inactivation during this process is unknown. In this study, we show that G2 and S-phase-expressed 1 (GTSE1) protein, a negative regulator of p53, is required for G2 checkpoint recovery and that Plk1 phosphorylation of GTSE1 at Ser 435 promotes its nuclear localization, and thus shuttles p53 out of the nucleus to lead to its degradation during the recovery.

20562916|a|Chemoresistance is a major cause of treatment failure and poor outcome in neuroblastoma. In this study, we investigated the expression and function of dual-specificity phosphatase 26 (DUSP26), also known as mitogen-activated protein kinase phophatase-8, in human neuroblastoma. We found that DUSP26 was expressed in a majority of neuroblastoma cell lines and tissue specimens. Importantly, we found that DUSP26 promotes the resistance of human neuroblastoma to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis by acting as a p53 phosphatase to downregulate p53 tumor suppressor function in neuroblastoma cells. Inhibiting DUSP26 expression in the IMR-32 neuroblastoma cell line enhanced doxorubicin-induced p53 phosphorylation at Ser20 and Ser37, p21, Puma, Bax expression as well as apoptosis. In contrast, DUSP26 overexpression in the SK-N-SH cell line inhibited doxorubicin-induced p53 phosphorylation at Ser20 and Ser37, p21, Puma, Bax expression and apoptosis. Using in vitro and in vivo assays, we found that DUSP26 binds to p53 and dephosphorylates p53 at Ser20 and Ser37. In this report, we show that DUSP26 functions as a p53 phosphatase, which suppresses downstream p53 activity in response to genotoxic stress. This suggests that inhibition of this phosphatase may increase neuroblastoma chemosensitivity and DUSP26 is a novel therapeutic target for this aggressive pediatric malignancy.

20543138|a|Synthesis of tRNA and 5S rRNA by RNA polymerase (pol) III is regulated by the mTOR pathway in mammalian cells. The mTOR kinase localizes to tRNA and 5S rRNA genes, providing an opportunity for direct control. Its presence at these sites can be explained by interaction with TFIIIC, a DNA-binding factor that recognizes the promoters of these genes. TFIIIC contains a TOR signaling motif that facilitates its association with mTOR. Maf1, a repressor that binds and inhibits pol III, is phosphorylated in a mTOR-dependent manner both in vitro and in vivo at serine 75, a site that contributes to its function as a transcriptional inhibitor. Proximity ligation assays confirm the interaction of mTOR with Maf1 and TFIIIC in nuclei. In contrast to Maf1 regulation in yeast, no evidence is found for nuclear export of Maf1 in response to mTOR signaling in HeLa cells. We conclude that mTOR associates with TFIIIC, is recruited to pol III-transcribed genes, and relieves their repression by Maf1.

20534451|a|Regulation of the actin-myosin cytoskeleton plays a central role in cell migration and cancer progression. Here, we report the discovery of a cytoskeleton-associated kinase, pseudopodium-enriched atypical kinase 1 (PEAK1). PEAK1 is a 190-kDa nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that localizes to actin filaments and focal adhesions. PEAK1 undergoes Src-induced tyrosine phosphorylation, regulates the p130Cas-Crk-paxillin and Erk signaling pathways, and operates downstream of integrin and epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) to control cell spreading, migration, and proliferation. Perturbation of PEAK1 levels in cancer cells alters anchorage-independent growth and tumor progression in mice. Notably, primary and metastatic samples from colon cancer patients display amplified PEAK1 levels in 81% of the cases. Our findings indicate that PEAK1 is an important cytoskeletal regulatory kinase and possible target for anticancer therapy.

20434206|a|Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) regulate diverse cellular functions by cleaving ubiquitin from specific protein substrates. How their activities are modulated in various cellular contexts remains poorly understood. The yeast deubiquitinase Ubp8 protein is recruited and activated by the SAGA complex and, together with Sgf11, Sus1, and Sgf73, forms a DUB module responsible for deubiquitinating histone H2B during gene expression. Here, we report the crystal structure of the complete SAGA DUB module, which features two functional lobes structurally coupled by Sgf73. In the "assembly lobe," a long Sgf11 N-terminal helix is clamped onto the Ubp8 ZnF-UBP domain by Sus1. In the "catalytic lobe," an Sgf11 C-terminal zinc-finger domain binds to the Ubp8 catalytic domain next to its active site. Our structural and functional analyses reveal a central role of Sgf11 and Sgf73 in activating Ubp8 for deubiquitinating histone H2B and demonstrate how a DUB can be allosterically regulated by its nonsubstrate partners.

20515039|a|Autosomal dominant mutations in leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). Despite the presence of multiple domains, the kinase activity of LRRK2 is thought to represent the primary function of the protein. Alterations in LRRK2 kinase activity are thought to underlie the pathogenesis of its PD-linked mutations; however, many questions regarding basic aspects of LRRK2 function remain unclear, including the cellular mechanisms of LRRK2 regulation and the importance of its unique distribution within the cell. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that the subcellular localization of wild-type LRRK2 is associated with changes in four distinct biochemical properties likely crucial for LRRK2 function. Our data demonstrate for the first time that the wild-type LRRK2 dimer possesses greater kinase activity than its more abundant monomeric counterpart. Importantly, we show that this activated form of LRRK2 is substantially enriched at the membrane of cells expressing endogenous or exogenous LRRK2, and that the membrane-associated fraction of LRRK2 likewise possesses greater kinase activity than cytosolic LRRK2. In addition, membrane-associated LRRK2 binds GTP more efficiently than cytosolic LRRK2 but demonstrates a lower degree of phosphorylation. Our observations suggest that multiple events, including altered protein-protein interactions and post-translational modifications, contribute to the regulation of LRRK2 function, through modulation of membrane association and complex assembly. These findings may have implications for the sites of LRRK2 function within the cell, the identification and localization of bona fide LRRK2 substrates, and efforts to design small molecule inhibitors of LRRK2.

11533444|a|Cyclin E binds and activates the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk2 and catalyzes the transition from the G1 phase to the S phase of the cell cycle. The amount of cyclin E protein present in the cell is tightly controlled by ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. Here we identify the ubiquitin ligase responsible for cyclin E ubiquitination as SCFFbw7 and demonstrate that it is functionally conserved in yeast, flies, and mammals. Fbw7 associates specifically with phosphorylated cyclin E, and SCFFbw7 catalyzes cyclin E ubiquitination in vitro. Depletion of Fbw7 leads to accumulation and stabilization of cyclin E in vivo in human and Drosophila melanogaster cells. Multiple F-box proteins contribute to cyclin E stability in yeast, suggesting an overlap in SCF E3 ligase specificity that allows combinatorial control of cyclin E degradation.

11559703|a|In Caenorhabditis elegans, fem-1, fem-2, and fem-3 play pivotal roles in sex determination. Recently, a mammalian homologue of the C. elegans sex-determining protein FEM-1, F1Aalpha, has been described. Although there is little evidence to link F1Aalpha to sex determination, F1Aalpha and FEM-1 both promote apoptosis in mammalian cells. Here we report the identification and characterization of a human homologue of the C. elegans sex-determining protein FEM-2, hFEM-2. Similar to FEM-2, hFEM-2 exhibited PP2C phosphatase activity and associated with FEM-3. hFEM-2 shows striking similarity (79% amino acid identity) to rat Ca(2+)/calmodulin (CaM)-dependent protein kinase phosphatase (rCaMKPase). hFEM-2 and FEM-2, but not PP2Calpha, were demonstrated to dephosphorylate CaM kinase II efficiently in vitro, suggesting that hFEM-2 and FEM-2 are specific phosphatases for CaM kinase. Furthermore, hFEM-2 and FEM-2 associated with F1Aalpha and FEM-1 respectively. Overexpression of hFEM-2, FEM-2, or rCaMKPase all mediated apoptosis in mammalian cells. The catalytically active, but not the inactive, forms of hFEM-2 induced caspase-dependent apoptosis, which was blocked by Bcl-XL or a dominant negative mutant of caspase-9. Taken together, our data suggest that hFEM-2 and rCaMKPase are mammalian homologues of FEM-2 and they are evolutionarily conserved CaM kinase phosphatases that may have a role in apoptosis signaling.

11238845|a|We have analyzed the effects of vaccinia virus (VV) on gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) signal transduction. Infection of cells with VV 1 to 2 h prior to treatment with IFN-gamma inhibits phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Stat1 and consequently blocks accumulation of mRNAs normally induced by IFN-gamma. While phosphorylation of other proteins in the IFN-gamma pathway was not affected, activation of Stat1 by other ligand-receptor systems was also blocked by VV. This block of Stat1 activation was dose dependent, and although viral protein synthesis was not required, entry and uncoating of viral cores appear to be needed to block the accumulation of phosphorylated Stat1. These results suggest that a virion component is responsible for the effect. VV virions contain a phosphatase (VH1) that is sensitive to the phosphatase inhibitor Na(3)VO(4) but not to okadaic acid. Addition of Na(3)VO(4) but not okadaic acid restored normal Stat1 phosphorylation levels in VV-infected cells. Moreover, virions containing reduced levels of VH1 were unable to block the IFN-gamma signaling pathway. In vitro studies show that the phosphatase can bind and dephosphorylate Stat1, indicating that this transcription factor can be a substrate for VH1. Our results reveal a novel mechanism by which VV interferes with the onset of host immune responses by blocking the IFN-gamma signal cascade through the dephosphorylating activity of the viral phosphatase VH1.

11259588|a|In this study, we investigate the role of the receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase CD148 in T-cell activation. Overexpression of CD148 in the Jurkat T-cell line inhibited activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells following T-cell receptor (TCR) stimulation but not following stimulation through a heterologously expressed G protein-coupled receptor, the human muscarinic receptor subtype 1. Using a tetracycline-inducible expression system, we show that the TCR-mediated activation of both the Ras and calcium pathways was inhibited by expression of CD148 at levels that approximate those found in activated primary T cells. These effects were dependent on the phosphatase activity of CD148. Analysis of TCR-induced protein tyrosine phosphorylation demonstrated that most phosphoproteins were unaffected by CD148 expression. However, phospholipase Cgamma1 (PLCgamma1) and LAT were strikingly hypophosphorylated in CD148-expressing cells following TCR stimulation, whereas the phosphorylation levels of Slp-76 and Itk were modestly reduced. Based on these results, we propose that CD148 negatively regulates TCR signaling by interfering with the phosphorylation and function of PLCgamma1 and LAT.

11027293|a|The high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 proteins stimulate the ubiquitination and degradation of p53, dependent on the E6AP ubiquitin-protein ligase. Other proteins have also been shown to be targeted for degradation by E6, including hDlg, the human homolog of the Drosophila melanogaster Discs large (Dlg) tumor suppressor. We show here that the human homolog of the Drosophila Scribble (Vartul) (hScrib) tumor suppressor protein is also targeted for ubiquitination by the E6-E6AP complex in vitro and that expression of E6 induces degradation of hScrib in vivo. Characterization of the E6AP-E6-hScrib complex indicated that hScrib binds directly to E6 and that the binding is mediated by the PDZ domains of hScrib and a carboxyl-terminal epitope conserved among the high-risk HPV E6 proteins. Green fluorescent protein-hScrib was localized to the periphery of MDCK cells, where it colocalized with ZO-1, a component of tight junctions. E6 expression resulted in loss of integrity of tight junctions, as measured by ZO-1 localization, and this effect was dependent on the PDZ binding epitope of E6. Thus, the high-risk HPV E6 proteins induce the degradation of the human homologs of two Drosophila PDZ domain-containing tumor suppressor proteins, hDlg and hScrib, both of which are associated with cell junction complexes. The fact that Scrib/Vart and Dlg appear to cooperate in a pathway that controls Drosophila epithelial cell growth suggests that the combined targeting of hScrib and hDlg is an important component of the biologic activity of high-risk HPV E6 proteins.

11063744|a|Protein kinase C-zeta (PKC-zeta) is a serine/threonine kinase downstream from phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in insulin signaling pathways. However, specific substrates for PKC-zeta that participate in the biological actions of insulin have not been reported. In the present study, we identified insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) as a novel substrate for PKC-zeta. Under in vitro conditions, wild-type PKC-zeta (but not kinase-deficient mutant PKC-zeta) significantly phosphorylated IRS-1. This phosphorylation was reversed by treatment with the serine-specific phosphatase, protein phosphatase 2A. In addition, the overexpression of PKC-zeta in NIH-3T3(IR) cells caused significant phosphorylation of cotransfected IRS-1 as demonstrated by [(32)P]orthophosphate labeling experiments. In rat adipose cells, endogenous IRS-1 coimmunoprecipitated with endogenous PKC-zeta, and this association was increased 2-fold upon insulin stimulation. Furthermore, the overexpression of PKC-zeta in NIH-3T3(IR) cells significantly impaired insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of cotransfected IRS-1. Importantly, this was accompanied by impaired IRS-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity. Taken together, our results raise the possibility that IRS-1 is a novel physiological substrate for PKC-zeta. Because PKC-zeta is located downstream from IRS-1 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in established insulin signaling pathways, PKC-zeta may participate in negative feedback pathways to IRS-1 similar to those described previously for Akt and GSK-3.

11163213|a|The protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B is responsible for negatively regulating insulin signaling by dephosphorylating the phosphotyrosine residues of the insulin receptor kinase (IRK) activation segment. Here, by integrating crystallographic, kinetic, and PTP1B peptide binding studies, we define the molecular specificity of this reaction. Extensive interactions are formed between PTP1B and the IRK sequence encompassing the tandem pTyr residues at 1162 and 1163 such that pTyr-1162 is selected at the catalytic site and pTyr-1163 is located within an adjacent pTyr recognition site. This selectivity is attributed to the 70-fold greater affinity for tandem pTyr-containing peptides relative to mono-pTyr peptides and predicts a hierarchical dephosphorylation process. Many elements of the PTP1B-IRK interaction are unique to PTP1B, indicating that it may be feasible to generate specific, small molecule inhibitors of this interaction to treat diabetes and obesity.

11526512|a|Cellular growth, differentiation and migration is regulated by protein tyrosine phosphorylation. Receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases are thus likely to be key regulators of vital cellular processes. The regulation of these enzymes is in general poorly understood. Ligands have been identified only for a small subset of the receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases and in no case has upregulation of the specific activity by extracellular ligands been demonstrated. Prompted by earlier findings of ligands for receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases in extracellular matrix we investigated if Matrigel, a preparation of extracellular matrix proteins, contained modulators of the specific activity of the receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase DEP-1. Matrigel stimulation of cells increased the specific activity of immunoprecipitated DEP-1. Also, incubation of immunoprecipitated DEP-1 with Matrigel led to an increase in DEP-1 activity, which was blocked by soluble DEP-1 extracellular domain. Finally, immunoprecipitated DeltaECD-DEP-1, a mutant form of DEP-1 lacking most of the extracellular domain, failed to respond to Matrigel stimulation. These experiments identify Matrigel as a source of DEP-1 agonist(s) and provide the first evidence for upregulation of the specific activity of receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases by extracellular ligands.

11533489|a|The nuclear expression and action of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) transcription factor requires signal-coupled phosphorylation and degradation of the IkappaB inhibitors, which normally bind and sequester this pleiotropically active factor in the cytoplasm. The subsequent molecular events that regulate the termination of nuclear NF-kappaB action remain poorly defined, although the activation of de novo IkappaBalpha gene expression by NF-kappaB likely plays a key role. Our studies now demonstrate that the RelA subunit of NF-kappaB is subject to inducible acetylation and that acetylated forms of RelA interact weakly, if at all, with IkappaBalpha. Acetylated RelA is subsequently deacetylated through a specific interaction with histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3). This deacetylation reaction promotes effective binding to IkappaBalpha and leads in turn to IkappaBalpha-dependent nuclear export of the complex through a chromosomal region maintenance-1 (CRM-1)-dependent pathway. Deacetylation of RelA by HDAC3 thus acts as an intranuclear molecular switch that both controls the duration of the NF-kappaB transcriptional response and contributes to the replenishment of the depleted cytoplasmic pool of latent NF-kappaB-IkappaBalpha complexes.

10938077|a|Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)/Rel transcription factors are key regulators of a variety of genes involved in immune and inflammatory responses, growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and development. In unstimulated cells, NF-kappaB/Rel proteins are sequestered in the cytoplasm by IkappaB inhibitor proteins. Many extracellular stimuli, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), cause rapid phosphorylation of IkappaB at N-terminal serine residues leading to ubiquitination and degradation of the inhibitor. Subsequently, NF-kappaB proteins translocate to the nucleus and activate gene expression through kappaB response elements. TNFalpha, as well as certain other stimuli, also induces the phosphorylation of the NF-kappaB proteins. Previously, we have shown that TNFalpha induces RelA/p65 phosphorylation at serine 529 and that this inducible phosphorylation increases NF-kappaB transcriptional activity on an exogenously supplied reporter (). In this report, we demonstrate that casein kinase II (CKII) interacts with p65 in vivo and can phosphorylate p65 at serine 529 in vitro. A CKII inhibitor (PD144795) inhibited TNFalpha-induced p65 phosphorylation in vivo. Furthermore, our results indicate that the association between IkappaBalpha and p65 inhibits p65 phosphorylation by CKII and that degradation of IkappaBalpha allows CKII to phosphorylate p65 to increase NF-kappaB transactivation potential. These data may explain the ability of CKII to modulate cell growth and demonstrate a mechanism whereby CKII can function in an inducible manner.

11181181|a|The strong inwardly rectifying potassium channels Kir2.x are involved in maintenance and control of cell excitability. Recent studies reveal that the function and localization of ion channels are regulated by interactions with members of the membrane-associated guanylate kinase (MAGUK) protein family. To identify novel interacting MAGUK family members, we constructed GST-fusion proteins with the C termini of Kir2.1, Kir2.2 and Kir2.3. GST affinity-pulldown assays from solubilized rat cerebellum and heart membrane proteins revealed an interaction between all three Kir2.x C-terminal fusion proteins and the MAGUK protein synapse-associated protein 97 (SAP97). A truncated form of the C-terminal GST-Kir2.2 fusion protein indicated that the last three amino acids (S-E-I) are essential for association with SAP97. Affinity interactions using GST-fusion proteins containing the modular domains of SAP97 demonstrate that the second PSD-95/Dlg/ZO-1 (PDZ) domain is sufficient for interaction with Kir2.2. Coimmunoprecipitations demonstrated that endogenous Kir2.2 associates with SAP97 in rat cerebellum and heart. Additionally, phosphorylation of the Kir2.2 C terminus by protein kinase A inhibited the association with SAP97. In rat cardiac ventricular myocytes, Kir2.2 and SAP97 colocalized in striated bands corresponding to T-tubules. In rat cerebellum, Kir2.2 was present in a punctate pattern along SAP97-positive processes of Bergmann glia in the molecular layer, and colocalized with astrocytes and granule cells in the granule cell layer. These results identify a direct association of Kir2.1, Kir2.2 and Kir2.3 with the MAGUK family member SAP97 that may form part of a macromolecular signaling complex in many different tissues.

11007774|a|c-Src tyrosine kinase activity is elevated in several types of human cancer, and this has been attributed to elevated c-Src expression levels, increased c-Src specific activity, and activating mutations in c-Src. We have found a number of human breast cancer cell lines with elevated c-Src specific activity that also possess elevated phosphatase activity directed against the carboxyl-terminal negative regulatory domain of Src family kinases. To identify this phosphatase, cell extracts from MDA-MB-435S cells were chromatographed and the fractions were assayed for phosphatase activity. Four peaks of phosphatase activity directed against the nonspecific substrate poly(Glu/Tyr) were detected. One peak also dephosphorylated a peptide modeled against the c-Src carboxyl-terminal negative regulatory domain and intact human c-Src. Immunoblotting and immunodepletion experiments identified the phosphatase as protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B). Examination of several human breast cancer cell lines with increased c-Src activity showed elevated levels of PTP1B protein relative to normal control breast cells. In vitro c-Src reactivation experiments confirmed the ability of PTP1B to dephosphorylate and activate c-Src. In vivo overexpression of PTP1B in 293 cells caused a 2-fold increase of endogenous c-Src kinase activity. Our findings indicate that PTP1B is the primary protein-tyrosine phosphatase capable of dephosphorylating c-Src in several human breast cancer cell lines and suggests a regulatory role for PTP1B in the control of c-Src kinase activity.

11546811|a|The ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, CDC34, has been implicated in the ubiquitination of a number of vertebrate substrates, including p27(Kip1), IkappaBalpha, Wee1, and MyoD. We show that mammalian CDC34 is a phosphoprotein that is phosphorylated in proliferating cells. By yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the regulatory (beta) subunit of human casein kinase 2 (CK2) as a CDC34-interacting protein and show that human CDC34 interacts in vivo with CK2beta in transfected cells. CDC34 is specifically phosphorylated in vitro by recombinant CK2 and HeLa nuclear extract at five sites within the carboxyl-terminal 36 amino acids of CDC34. Importantly, this phosphorylation is inhibited by heparin, a substrate-specific inhibitor of CK2. We have also identified a kinase activity associated with CDC34 in proliferating cells, and we show that this kinase is sensitive to heparin and can utilize GTP, strongly suggesting it is CK2. Phosphorylation of CDC34 by the associated kinase maps predominantly to residues 203 and 222. Mutation of CDC34 at CK2-targeted residues, Ser-203, Ser-222, Ser-231, Thr-233, and Ser-236, abolishes the phosphorylation of CDC34 observed in vivo and markedly shifts nuclearly localized CDC34 to the cytoplasm. These results suggest a potential role for CK2-mediated phosphorylation in the regulation of CDC34 cell localization and function.

11500364|a|Elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF2k) phosphorylates and inactivates eEF2. Insulin induces dephosphorylation of eEF2 and inactivation of eEF2 kinase, and these effects are blocked by rapamycin, which inhibits the mammalian target of rapamycin, mTOR. However, the signalling mechanisms underlying these effects are unknown. Regulation of eEF2 phosphorylation and eEF2k activity is lost in cells in which phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) has been genetically knocked out. This is not due to loss of mTOR function since phosphorylation of another target of mTOR, initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1, is not defective. PDK1 is required for activation of members of the AGC kinase family; we show that two such kinases, p70 S6 kinase (regulated via mTOR) and p90(RSK1) (activated by Erk), phosphorylate eEF2k at a conserved serine and inhibit its activity. In response to insulin-like growth factor 1, which activates p70 S6 kinase but not Erk, regulation of eEF2 is blocked by rapamycin. In contrast, regulation of eEF2 by stimuli that activate Erk is insensitive to rapamycin, but blocked by inhibitors of MEK/Erk signalling, consistent with the involvement of p90(RSK1).

11579209|a|PTP1B is a protein tyrosine phosphatase that negatively regulates insulin sensitivity by dephosphorylating the insulin receptor. Akt is a ser/thr kinase effector of insulin signaling that phosphorylates substrates at the consensus motif RXRXXS/T. Interestingly, PTP1B contains this motif (RYRDVS(50)), and wild-type PTP1B (but not mutants with substitutions for Ser(50)) was significantly phosphorylated by Akt in vitro. To determine whether PTP1B is a substrate for Akt in intact cells, NIH-3T3(IR) cells transfected with either wild-type PTP1B or PTP1B-S50A were labeled with [(32)P]-orthophosphate. Insulin stimulation caused a significant increase in phosphorylation of wild-type PTP1B that could be blocked by pretreatment of cells with wortmannin or cotransfection of a dominant inhibitory Akt mutant. Similar results were observed with endogenous PTP1B in untransfected HepG2 cells. Cotransfection of constitutively active Akt caused robust phosphorylation of wild-type PTP1B both in the absence and presence of insulin. By contrast, PTP1B-S50A did not undergo phosphorylation in response to insulin. We tested the functional significance of phosphorylation at Ser(50) by evaluating insulin receptor autophosphorylation in transfected Cos-7 cells. Insulin treatment caused robust receptor autophosphorylation that could be substantially reduced by coexpression of wild-type PTP1B. Similar results were obtained with coexpression of PTP1B-S50A. However, under the same conditions, PTP1B-S50D had an impaired ability to dephosphorylate the insulin receptor. Moreover, cotransfection of constitutively active Akt significantly inhibited the ability of wild-type PTP1B, but not PTP1B-S50A, to dephosphorylate the insulin receptor. We conclude that PTP1B is a novel substrate for Akt and that phosphorylation of PTP1B by Akt at Ser(50) may negatively modulate its phosphatase activity creating a positive feedback mechanism for insulin signaling.

11279131|a|The cytosolic domain of the beta-amyloid precursor protein APP interacts with three PTB (phosphotyrosine binding domain)-containing adaptor proteins, Fe65, X11, and mDab1. Through these adaptors, other molecules can be recruited at the cytodomain of APP; one of them is Mena, that binds to the WW domain (a protein module with two conserved tryptophans) of Fe65. The enabled and disabled genes of Drosophila, homologues of the mammalian Mena and mDab1 genes, respectively, are genetic modulators of the phenotype observed in flies null for the Abl tyrosine kinase gene. The involvement of Mena and mDab1 in the APP-centered protein-protein interaction network suggests the possibility that Abl plays a role in APP biology. We show that Fe65, through its WW domain, binds in vitro and in vivo the active form of Abl. Furthermore, in cells expressing the active form of Abl, APP is tyrosine-phosphorylated. Phosphopeptide analysis and site-directed mutagenesis support the hypothesis that Tyr(682) of APP(695) is the target of this phosphorylation. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that active Abl and tyrosine-phosphorylated APP also form a stable complex, which could result from the interaction of the pYENP motif of the APP cytodomain with the SH2 domain of Abl. These results suggest that Abl, Mena, and mDab1 are involved in a common molecular machinery and that APP can play a role in tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling.

10993906|a|In an effort to clone novel tyrosine-phosphorylated substrates of the epidermal growth factor receptor, we have initiated an approach coupling affinity purification using anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies to mass spectrometry-based identification. Here, we report the identification of a signaling molecule containing a Src homology 3 domain as well as an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM). This molecule is 55% identical to a previously isolated molecule designated signal transducing adaptor molecule (STAM) that was identified as an interleukin (IL)-2-induced phosphoprotein and is therefore designated STAM2. Tyrosine phosphorylation of STAM2 is induced by growth factors such as epidermal growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor as well as by cytokines like IL-3. Several of the deletion mutants tested except the one containing only the amino-terminal region underwent tyrosine phosphorylation upon growth factor stimulation, implying that STAM2 is phosphorylated on several tyrosine residues. STAM2 is downstream of the Jak family of kinases since coexpression of STAM2 with Jak1 or Jak2 but not an unrelated Tec family kinase, Etk, resulted in its tyrosine phosphorylation. In contrast to epidermal growth factor receptor-induced phosphorylation, this required the ITAM domain since mutants lacking this region did not undergo tyrosine phosphorylation. Finally, overexpression of wild type STAM2 led to an increase in IL-2-mediated induction of c-Myc promoter activation indicating that it potentiates cytokine receptor signaling.

11298456|a|When exposed to ionizing radiation (IR), eukaryotic cells activate checkpoint pathways to delay the progression of the cell cycle. Defects in the IR-induced S-phase checkpoint cause 'radioresistant DNA synthesis', a phenomenon that has been identified in cancer-prone patients suffering from ataxia-telangiectasia, a disease caused by mutations in the ATM gene. The Cdc25A phosphatase activates the cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (Cdk2) needed for DNA synthesis, but becomes degraded in response to DNA damage or stalled replication. Here we report a functional link between ATM, the checkpoint signalling kinase Chk2/Cds1 (Chk2) and Cdc25A, and implicate this mechanism in controlling the S-phase checkpoint. We show that IR-induced destruction of Cdc25A requires both ATM and the Chk2-mediated phosphorylation of Cdc25A on serine 123. An IR-induced loss of Cdc25A protein prevents dephosphorylation of Cdk2 and leads to a transient blockade of DNA replication. We also show that tumour-associated Chk2 alleles cannot bind or phosphorylate Cdc25A, and that cells expressing these Chk2 alleles, elevated Cdc25A or a Cdk2 mutant unable to undergo inhibitory phosphorylation (Cdk2AF) fail to inhibit DNA synthesis when irradiated. These results support Chk2 as a candidate tumour suppressor, and identify the ATM-Chk2-Cdc25A-Cdk2 pathway as a genomic integrity checkpoint that prevents radioresistant DNA synthesis.

11506178|a|We have previously reported a direct in vivo interaction between the activated insulin receptor and protein-tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP1B), which leads to an increase in PTP1B tyrosine phosphorylation. In order to determine if PTP1B is a substrate for the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase, the phosphorylation of the Cys 215 Ser, catalytically inactive mutant PTP1B (CS-PTP1B) was measured in the presence of partially purified and activated insulin receptor. In vitro, the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase catalyzed the tyrosine phosphorylation of PTP1B. 53% of the total cellular PTP1B became tyrosine phosphorylated in response to insulin in vivo. Tyrosine phosphorylation of PTP1B by the insulin receptor was absolutely dependent upon insulin-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation and required an intact kinase domain, containing insulin receptor tyrosines 1146, 1150 and 1151. Tyrosine phosphorylation of wild type PTP1B by the insulin receptor kinase increased phosphatase activity of the protein. Intermolecular transdephosphorylation was demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo, by dephosphorylation of phosphorylated CS-PTP1B by the active wild type enzyme either in a cell-free system or via expression of the wild type PTP1B into Hirc-M cell line, which constitutively overexpress the human insulin receptor and CS-PTP1B. These results suggest that PTP1B is a target protein for the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase and PTP1B can regulate its own phosphatase activity by maintaining the balance between its phosphorylated (the active form) and dephosphorylated (the inactive form) state.

11136729|a|Insulin signaling is regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation of the signaling molecules, such as the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrates (IRSs). Therefore, the balance between protein-tyrosine kinases and protein-tyrosine phosphatase activities is thought to be important in the modulation of insulin signaling in insulin-resistant states. We thus employed the adenovirus-mediated gene transfer technique, and we analyzed the effect of overexpression of a wild-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP1B) on insulin signaling in both L6 myocytes and Fao cells. In both cells, PTP1B overexpression blocked insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and IRS-1 by more than 70% and resulted in a significant inhibition of the association between IRS-1 and the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Akt phosphorylation as well as mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation. Moreover, insulin-stimulated glycogen synthesis was also inhibited by PTP1B overexpression in both cells. These effects were specific for insulin signaling, because platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-stimulated PDGF receptor tyrosine phosphorylation and Akt phosphorylation were not inhibited by PTP1B overexpression. The present findings demonstrate that PTP1B negatively regulates insulin signaling in L6 and Fao cells, suggesting that PTP1B plays an important role in insulin resistance in muscle and liver.

11287000|a|Myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) and Rho-kinase are related. An important function of Rho-kinase is to phosphorylate the myosin-binding subunit of myosin phosphatase (MYPT1) and inhibit phosphatase activity. Experiments were carried out to determine if DMPK could function similarly. MYPT1 was phosphorylated by DMPK. The phosphorylation site(s) was in the C-terminal part of the molecule. DMPK was not inhibited by the Rho-kinase inhibitors, Y-27632 and HA-1077. Several approaches were taken to determine that a major site of phosphorylation was T654. Phosphorylation at T654 inhibited phosphatase activity. Thus both DMPK and Rho-kinase may regulate myosin II phosphorylation.

11438675|a|The checkpoint kinase Chk2 has a key role in delaying cell cycle progression in response to DNA damage. Upon activation by low-dose ionizing radiation (IR), which occurs in an ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-dependent manner, Chk2 can phosphorylate the mitosis-inducing phosphatase Cdc25C on an inhibitory site, blocking entry into mitosis, and p53 on a regulatory site, causing G(1) arrest. Here we show that the ATM-dependent activation of Chk2 by gamma- radiation requires Nbs1, the gene product involved in the Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), a disorder that shares with AT a variety of phenotypic defects including chromosome fragility, radiosensitivity, and radioresistant DNA synthesis. Thus, whereas in normal cells Chk2 undergoes a time-dependent increased phosphorylation and induction of catalytic activity against Cdc25C, in NBS cells null for Nbs1 protein, Chk2 phosphorylation and activation are both defective. Importantly, these defects in NBS cells can be complemented by reintroduction of wild-type Nbs1, but neither by a carboxy-terminal deletion mutant of Nbs1 at amino acid 590, unable to form a complex with and to transport Mre11 and Rad50 in the nucleus, nor by an Nbs1 mutated at Ser343 (S343A), the ATM phosphorylation site. Chk2 nuclear expression is unaffected in NBS cells, hence excluding a mislocalization as the cause of failed Chk2 activation in Nbs1-null cells. Interestingly, the impaired Chk2 function in NBS cells correlates with the inability, unlike normal cells, to stop entry into mitosis immediately after irradiation, a checkpoint abnormality that can be corrected by introduction of the wild-type but not the S343A mutant form of Nbs1. Altogether, these findings underscore the crucial role of a functional Nbs1 complex in Chk2 activation and suggest that checkpoint defects in NBS cells may result from the inability to activate Chk2.

11434923|a|The tyrosine phosphatase r-PTPeta is able to suppress the malignant phenotype of rat thyroid tumorigenic cell lines. To identify r-PTPeta interacting proteins, a yeast two-hybrid screening was performed and an insert corresponding to the full-length syntenin cDNA was isolated. It encodes a protein containing two PDZ domains that mediates the binding of syntenin to proteins such as syndecan, proTGF-alpha, beta-ephrins and neurofascin. We show that r-PTPeta is able to interact with syntenin also in mammalian cells, and although syntenin is a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein it is not a substrate of r-PTPeta. The integrity of both PDZ domains of syntenin and the carboxy-terminal region of r-PTPeta are required for the interaction between syntenin and r-PTPeta.

11283256|a|Myotonic dystrophy kinase-related Cdc42-binding kinase (MRCK) is a Cdc42-binding serine/threonine kinase with multiple functional domains. We had previously shown MRCKalpha to be implicated in Cdc42-mediated peripheral actin formation and neurite outgrowth in HeLa and PC12 cells, respectively. Here we demonstrate that native MRCK exists in high-molecular-weight complexes. We further show that the three independent coiled-coil (CC) domains and the N-terminal region preceding the kinase domain are responsible for intermolecular interactions leading to MRCKalpha multimerization. N terminus-mediated dimerization and consequent transautophosphorylation are critical processes regulating MRCKalpha catalytic activities. A region containing the two distal CC domains (CC2 and CC3; residues 658 to 930) was found to interact intramolecularly with the kinase domain and negatively regulates its activity. Its deletion also resulted in an active kinase, confirming a negative autoregulatory role. We provide evidence that the N terminus-mediated dimerization and activation of MRCK and the negative autoregulatory kinase-distal CC interaction are two mutually exclusive events that tightly regulate the catalytic state of the kinase. Disruption of this interaction by a mutant kinase domain resulted in increased kinase activity. MRCK kinase activity was also elevated when cells were treated with phorbol ester, which can interact directly with a cysteine-rich domain next to the distal CC domain. We therefore suggest that binding of phorbol ester to MRCK releases its autoinhibition, allowing N-terminal dimerization and subsequent kinase activation.

10951572|a|The tumour suppressor p53 protein integrates multiple signals regulating cell cycle progression and apoptosis. This regulation is mediated by several kinases that phosphorylate specific residues in the different functional domains of the p53 molecule. The human VRK1 protein is a new kinase related to a poxvirus kinase, and more distantly to the casein kinase 1 family. We have characterized the biochemical properties of human VRK1 from HeLa cells. VRK1 has a strong autophosphorylating activity in several Ser and Thr residues. VRK-1 phosphorylates acidic proteins, such as phosvitin and casein, and basic proteins such as histone 2b and myelin basic protein. Because some transcription factors are regulated by phosphorylation, we tested as substrates the N-transactivation domains of p53 and c-Jun fused to GST. Human c-Jun is not phosphorylated by VRK1. VRK1 phosphorylates murine p53 in threonine 18. This threonine is within the p53 hydrophobic loop (residues 13-23) required for the interaction of p53 with the cleft of its inhibitor mdm-2. The VRK1 C-terminus domain (residues 268-396) that contains a nuclear localization signal targets the protein to the nucleus, as determined by using fusion proteins with the green fluorescent protein. We conclude that VRK1 is an upstream regulator of p53 that belongs to a new signalling pathway.

10949293|a|The organization of chromatin into higher-order structures influences chromosome function and epigenetic gene regulation. Higher-order chromatin has been proposed to be nucleated by the covalent modification of histone tails and the subsequent establishment of chromosomal subdomains by non-histone modifier factors. Here we show that human SUV39H1 and murine Suv39h1--mammalian homologues of Drosophila Su(var)3-9 and of Schizosaccharomyces pombe clr4--encode histone H3-specific methyltransferases that selectively methylate lysine 9 of the amino terminus of histone H3 in vitro. We mapped the catalytic motif to the evolutionarily conserved SET domain, which requires adjacent cysteine-rich regions to confer histone methyltransferase activity. Methylation of lysine 9 interferes with phosphorylation of serine 10, but is also influenced by pre-existing modifications in the amino terminus of H3. In vivo, deregulated SUV39H1 or disrupted Suv39h activity modulate H3 serine 10 phosphorylation in native chromatin and induce aberrant mitotic divisions. Our data reveal a functional interdependence of site-specific H3 tail modifications and suggest a dynamic mechanism for the regulation of higher-order chromatin.

10924358|a|A novel mixed lineage kinase-like protein ZAK, containing a leucine-zipper (LZ) and a sterile-alpha motif (SAM), was cloned. This cDNA has 2456 bp and encodes a protein of 800 amino acids that contains a kinase catalytic domain, a leucine-zipper and a SAM. The molecular weight of this protein is 91kDa. Northern blot analysis revealed that the expression of this ZAK gene is found in various parts of human tissues. We also found that ZAK proteins might form homodimers or oligomers in mammalian cells. MLKs have been proposed to function as mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase in pathways leading to MAPK cascade. The expression of ZAK in mammalian cells specifically leads to the activation of the JNK/SAPK pathway as well as the activation of transcription factor, NF-kappaB. Overexpression of the ZAK gene induces the apoptosis of a hepatoma cell line.

11154276|a|The Akt family of serine/threonine-directed kinases promotes cellular survival in part by phosphorylating and inhibiting death-inducing proteins. Here we describe a novel functional interaction between Akt and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase. Akt decreased ASK1 kinase activity stimulated by both oxidative stress and overexpression in 293 cells by phosphorylating a consensus Akt site at serine 83 of ASK1. Activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-K)/Akt pathway also inhibited the serum deprivation-induced activity of endogenous ASK1 in L929 cells. An association between Akt and ASK1 was detected in cells by coimmunoprecipitation. Phosphorylation by Akt inhibited ASK1-mediated c-Jun N-terminal kinase and activating transcription factor 2 activities in intact cells. Finally, activation of the PI3-K/Akt pathway reduced apoptosis induced by ASK1 in a manner dependent on phosphorylation of serine 83 of ASK1. These results provide the first direct link between Akt and the family of stress-activated kinases.

10975519|a|Phosphorylation of histone H3 at serine 10 occurs during mitosis and meiosis in a wide range of eukaryotes and has been shown to be required for proper chromosome transmission in Tetrahymena. Here we report that Ipl1/aurora kinase and its genetically interacting phosphatase, Glc7/PP1, are responsible for the balance of H3 phosphorylation during mitosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis elegans. In these models, both enzymes are required for H3 phosphorylation and chromosome segregation, although a causal link between the two processes has not been demonstrated. Deregulation of human aurora kinases has been implicated in oncogenesis as a consequence of chromosome missegregation. Our findings reveal an enzyme system that regulates chromosome dynamics and controls histone phosphorylation that is conserved among diverse eukaryotes.

11425858|a|Although casein kinase Iepsilon (CKIepsilon) has been shown to regulate the Wnt signaling pathway positively, its mode of action is not clear. In this study we show that CKIepsilon activates the Wnt signaling pathway in co-operation with Dvl. CKIepsilon and Axin associated with different sites of Dvl, and CKIepsilon and Dvl interacted with distinct regions on Axin. Therefore, these three proteins formed a ternary complex. Either low expression of Dvl or CKIepsilon alone did not accumulate beta-catenin, but their co-expression accumulated greatly. Dvl and CKIepsilon activated the transcriptional activity of T cell factor (Tcf) synergistically. Although the Dvl mutant that binds to Axin but not to CKIepsilon activated Tcf, it did not synergize with CKIepsilon. Another Dvl mutant that does not bind to Axin did not activate Tcf irrespective of the presence of CKIepsilon. Furthermore, Dvl and CKIepsilon co-operatively induced axis duplication of Xenopus embryos. These results indicate that Dvl and CKIepsilon synergistically activated the Wnt signaling pathway and that the binding of the complex of Dvl and CKIepsilon to Axin is necessary for their synergistic action.

11577348|a|Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is required for human and mouse B cell development. Btk deficiency causes X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) in humans and X-linked immunodeficiency in mice. Unlike Src proteins, Btk lacks a negative regulatory domain at the COOH terminus and may rely on cytoplasmic Btk-binding proteins to regulates its kinase activity by trans-inhibitor mechanisms. Consistent with this possibility, IBtk, which we identified as an inhibitor of Btk, bound to the PH domain of Btk. IBtk downregulated Btk kinase activity, Btk-mediated calcium mobilization and nuclear factor-kappaB-driven transcription. These results define a potential mechanism for the regulation of Btk function in B cells.

20810653|a|The Slit-Robo GTPase-activating proteins (srGAPs) are critical for neuronal migration through inactivation of Rho GTPases Cdc42, Rac1, and RhoA. Here we report that srGAP2 physically interacts with protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5). srGAP2 localizes to the cytoplasm and plasma membrane protrusion. srGAP2 knockdown reduces cell adhesion spreading and increases cell migration, but has no effect on cell proliferation. PRMT5 binds to the N terminus of srGAP2 (225-538 aa) and methylates its C-terminal arginine residue Arg-927. The methylation mutant srGAP2-R927A fails to rescue the cell spreading rate, is unable to localize to the plasma membrane leading edge, and perturbs srGAP2 homodimer formation mediated by the F-BAR domain. These results suggest that srGAP2 arginine methylation plays important roles in cell spreading and cell migration through influencing membrane protrusion.

20864041|a|The melanoma antigen (MAGE) family consists of more than 60 genes, many of which are cancer-testis antigens that are highly expressed in cancer and play a critical role in tumorigenesis. However, the biochemical and cellular functions of this enigmatic family of proteins have remained elusive. Here, we identify really interesting new gene (RING) domain proteins as binding partners for MAGE family proteins. Multiple MAGE family proteins bind E3 RING ubiquitin ligases with specificity. The crystal structure of one of these MAGE-RING complexes, MAGE-G1-NSE1, reveals structural insights into MAGE family proteins and their interaction with E3 RING ubiquitin ligases. Biochemical and cellular assays demonstrate that MAGE proteins enhance the ubiquitin ligase activity of RING domain proteins. For example, MAGE-C2-TRIM28 is shown to target p53 for degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner, consistent with its tumorigenic functions. These findings define a biochemical and cellular function for the MAGE protein family.

20729810|a|G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinases (GRKs) selectively recognize and are allosterically regulated by activated GPCRs, but the molecular basis for this interaction is not understood. Herein, we report crystal structures of GRK6 in which regions known to be critical for receptor phosphorylation have coalesced to stabilize the kinase domain in a closed state and to form a likely receptor docking site. The crux of this docking site is an extended N-terminal helix that bridges the large and small lobes of the kinase domain and lies adjacent to a basic surface of the protein proposed to bind anionic phospholipids. Mutation of exposed, hydrophobic residues in the N-terminal helix selectively inhibits receptor, but not peptide phosphorylation, suggesting that these residues interact directly with GPCRs. Our structural and biochemical results thus provide an explanation for how receptor recognition, phospholipid binding, and kinase activation are intimately coupled in GRKs.

20639859|a|14-3-3 proteins control various cellular processes, including cell cycle progression and DNA damage checkpoint. At the DNA damage checkpoint, some subtypes of 14-3-3 (beta and zeta isoforms in mammalian cells and Rad24 in fission yeast) bind to Ser345-phosphorylated Chk1 and promote its nuclear retention. Here, we report that 14-3-3gamma forms a complex with Chk1 phosphorylated at Ser296, but not at ATR sites (Ser317 and Ser345). Ser296 phosphorylation is catalysed by Chk1 itself after Chk1 phosphorylation by ATR, and then ATR sites are rapidly dephosphorylated on Ser296-phosphorylated Chk1. Although Ser345 phosphorylation is observed at nuclear DNA damage foci, it occurs more diffusely in the nucleus. The replacement of endogenous Chk1 with Chk1 mutated at Ser296 to Ala induces premature mitotic entry after ultraviolet irradiation, suggesting the importance of Ser296 phosphorylation in the DNA damage response. Although Ser296 phosphorylation induces the only marginal change in Chk1 catalytic activity, 14-3-3gamma mediates the interaction between Chk1 and Cdc25A. This ternary complex formation has an essential function in Cdc25A phosphorylation and degradation to block premature mitotic entry after DNA damage.

20871633|a|The retinoblastoma protein (Rb) inhibits both cell division and apoptosis, but the mechanism by which Rb alternatively regulates these divergent outcomes remains poorly understood. Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) promote cell division by phosphorylating and reversibly inactivating Rb by a hierarchical series of phosphorylation events and sequential conformational changes. The stress-regulated mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 also phosphorylates Rb, but it does so in a cell cycle-independent manner that is associated with apoptosis rather than with cell division. Here, we show that p38 phosphorylates Rb by a novel mechanism that is distinct from that of Cdks. p38 bypasses the cell cycle-associated hierarchical phosphorylation and directly phosphorylates Rb on Ser567, which is not phosphorylated during the normal cell cycle. Phosphorylation by p38, but not Cdks, triggers an interaction between Rb and the human homolog of murine double minute 2 (Hdm2), leading to degradation of Rb, release of E2F1 and cell death. These findings provide a mechanistic explanation as to how Rb regulates cell division and apoptosis through different kinases, and reveal how Hdm2 may functionally link the tumor suppressors Rb and p53.

20871632|a|The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase family and have been implicated in tumorigenesis. One isoform in particular, JNK2α, has been shown to be frequently activated in primary brain tumors, to enhance several tumorigenic phenotypes and to increase tumor formation in mice. As JNK is frequently activated in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), we investigated the role of the JNK2α isoform in NSCLC formation by examining its expression in primary tumors and by modulating its expression in cultured cell lines. We discovered that 60% of the tested primary NSCLC tumors had three-fold higher JNK2 protein and two- to three-fold higher JNK2α mRNA expression than normal lung control tissue. To determine the importance of JNK2α in NSCLC progression, we reduced JNK2α expression in multiple NSCLC cell lines using short hairpin RNA. Cell lines deficient in JNK2α had decreased cellular growth and anchorage-independent growth, and the tumors were four-fold smaller in mass. To elucidate the mechanism by which JNK2α induces NSCLC growth, we analyzed the JNK substrate, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). Our data demonstrates for the first time that JNK2α can regulate the transcriptional activity of STAT3 by phosphorylating the Ser727 residue, thereby regulating the expression of oncogenic genes, such as c-Myc. Furthermore, reintroduction of JNK2α2 or STAT3 restored the tumorigenicity of the NSCLC cells, demonstrating that JNK2α is important for NSCLC progression. Our studies reveal a novel mechanism in which phosphorylation of STAT3 is mediated by a constitutively active JNK2 isoform, JNK2α.

20856196|a|The overexpression of human apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonuclease 1 (APE1/Ref-1), a key enzyme in the DNA base excision repair (BER) pathway, is often associated with tumor cell resistance to various anticancer drugs. In this study, we examined the molecular basis of transcriptional regulatory (nonrepair) function of APE1 in promoting resistance to certain types of drugs. We have recently shown that APE1 stably interacts with Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1), and acts as its coactivator for the expression of multidrug resistance gene MDR1, thereby causing drug resistance. In this study, we show, to the best of our knowledge, for the first time that APE1 is stably associated with the basic transcription factor RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II) and the coactivator p300 on the endogenous MDR1 promoter. The depletion of APE1 significantly reduces YB-1-p300 recruitment to the promoter, resulting in reduced RNA pol II loading. Drug-induced APE1 acetylation, which is mediated by p300, enhances formation of acetylated APE1 (AcAPE1)-YB-1-p300 complex on the MDR1 promoter. Enhanced recruitment of this complex increases MDR1 promoter-dependent luciferase activity and its endogenous expression. Using APE1-downregulated cells and cells overexpressing wild-type APE1 or its nonacetylable mutant, we have demonstrated that the loss of APE1's acetylation impaired MDR1 activation and sensitizes the cells to cisplatin or etoposide. We have thus established the basis for APE1's acetylation-dependent regulatory function in inducing MDR1-mediated drug resistance.

20890305|a|The Neurofibromatosis-2 (NF2) tumor suppressor merlin negatively regulates cell proliferation in numerous cell types. We have previously shown that the NF2 protein (merlin/schwannomin) associates with mixed lineage kinase 3 (MLK3), a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase kinase that is required for the proliferation of normal and neoplastic cells. In this study, we show that merlin inhibits MLK3 activity, as well as the activation of its downstream effectors, B-Raf, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). The ability of merlin to regulate MLK3 activity requires a direct association between MLK3 and residues in the C-terminal region of merlin. Merlin integrates Rho GTPase family signaling with MAPK activity by inhibiting the binding between MLK3 and its upstream activator, Cdc42. Furthermore, we demonstrate that MLK3 is required for merlin-mediated suppression of cell proliferation and invasion. Collectively, these results establish merlin as a potent inhibitor of MLK3, ERK and JNK activation in cancer, and provide a mechanistic link between deregulated MAPK and Rho GTPase signaling in NF2 growth control.

20622900|a|The cell polarity regulator, human Scribble (hScrib), is a potential tumour suppressor whose loss is a frequent event in late-stage cancer development. Little is yet known about the mode of action of hScrib, although recent reports suggest its role in the regulation of cell signalling. In this study we show that hScrib is a direct regulator of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). In human keratinocytes, loss of hScrib results in elevated phospho-ERK levels and concomitant increased nuclear translocation of phospho-ERK. We also show that hScrib interacts with ERK through two well-conserved kinase interaction motif (KIM) docking sites, both of which are also required for ERK-induced phosphorylation of hScrib on two distinct residues. Although wild-type hScrib can downregulate activation of ERK and oncogenic Ras co-transforming activity, an hScrib mutant that lacks the carboxy terminal KIM docking site has no such effects. These results provide a clear mechanistic explanation of how hScrib can regulate ERK signalling and begin to explain how loss of hScrib during cancer development can contribute to disease progression.

20802513|a|Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) has a crucial role in integration of signals from integrins and growth factor receptors. In this study, we demonstrate that growth factor receptors including hepatocyte growth factor receptor Met, epidermal growth factor receptor, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor directly phosphorylate FAK on Tyr194 in the FERM domain (band 4.1 and ezrin/radixin/moesin homology domain). Upon binding to Met or phosphoinositides, FAK may undergo conformational changes, which renders Tyr194 accessible for phosphorylation. Substitution of Tyr194 with Phe significantly suppresses the activation of FAK by Met. In contrast, substitution of Tyr194 with Glu (Y194E substitution) leads to constitutive activation of FAK. The phosphorylation of FAK on Tyr194 may cause conformational changes in the FERM domain, which disrupts the intramolecular inhibitory interaction between the FERM and kinase domains of FAK. Moreover, substitution of the basic residues in the (216)KAKTLRK(222) patch in the FERM domain with Ala antagonizes the effect of the Y194E substitution on FAK activation, thus suggesting that the interactions between the phosphorylated Tyr194 and the basic resides in the (216)KAKTLRK(222) patch may allow FAK to be activated through relief of its autoinhibition. Collectively, this study provides the first example to explain how FAK is activated by receptor tyrosine kinases.

